<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en"><head>
  
  
  


















</head>

<body><div style="text-align:center"/>
  <section id="titlepage">

    <h1>
       <span>Os Lusiadas</span>
      <br/>
      <span id="secondary-title">(The Lusiads)</span>
    </h1>

    <p class="center uppercase top-space">
    Englished<br/>
    by<br/>
    <span class="larger">Richard Francis Burton</span>
    </p>

    <p class="uppercase top-space">
      <span class="larger">(Edited by His Wife,<br/>
      Isabel Burton).</span>
    </p>

    <p class="uppercase top-space">In Two Volumes - <abbr title="Volume">Vol.</abbr> I.</p>

    <p class="uppercase top-space">
      London:<br/>
      <span class="larger">Bernard Quaritch,</span><br/>
      15 Piccadilly, <abbr title="West">W.</abbr><br/>
      1880.<br/>
      <span class="smaller">All Rights Reserved.</span>
    </p>
  </section>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

  <div id="copyright">

    <p class="center uppercase">
      Wyman and Sons, Printers,<br/>
      Great Queen Street, Lincoln’s-Inn-Fields,<br/>
      London, <abbr title="Western Central">W.C.</abbr>
    </p>

  </div>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

  <div id="dedication-1">

    <blockquote class="center smcap"><div>
      <p>
        <span>To</span>
        <br/>
        <span><abbr title="His Imperial Majesty">H. I. M.</abbr></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="larger uppercase">Dom Pedro de Alcantara,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>(<abbr title="Dom">D.</abbr> Pedro II.)</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Constitutional Emperor, and Perpetual Defender</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="larger uppercase">The Brazil;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Man rather than the Monarch</span>
        <br/>
        <span>this Version of a Poem,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>so dear to the heart of every Brazilian,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>is offered</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by</span>
        <br/>
        <span>His Emperial Majesty’s</span>
        <br/>
        <span>most obedient</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="indent">humble Servant,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="uppercase right">The Translator.</span>
      </p>
    </div></blockquote>
  </div>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

  <div id="epigraph">

    <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

      <p class="italics" lang="it">
        <span>Il far un libro è meno che niente,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Se il libro fatto non rifà la gente.</span>
      </p>
      <cite>Giusti.</cite>

    </div></blockquote>

    <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

      <p class="italics">
        <span class="i6">Place, riches, favour,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Prizes of accident as oft as merit.</span>
      </p>
     <cite>Shakespeare.</cite>
    </div></blockquote>

    <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

      <p class="italics">
        <span lang="pt">Ora toma a espada, agora a penna</span>
        <br/>
        <span>(Now with the sword-hilt, then with pen in hand).</span>
      </p>
      <cite><abbr title="Camões">Cam.</abbr>, <i><abbr class="normal" title="Sonnets">Sonn.</abbr> 192</i>.</cite>
    </div></blockquote>

    <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

      <p class="italics" lang="it">
        <span>Bramo assai,—poco spero,—nulla chiedo.</span>
      </p>
      <cite>Tasso.</cite>

    </div></blockquote>

    <blockquote><div>
      <p class="italics" lang="fr">Tout cela prouve enfin que l’ouvrage est plein de grandes beautés,
      puisque depuis deux cents ans il fait les délices d’une nation
      spirituelle qui doit en connôitre les fautes.</p>
      <cite>Voltaire, <span class="normal"><i>Essai, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr></i></span></cite>
    </div></blockquote>
  </div>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

  <div id="dedication-2">

    <header class="center">
      <p class="uppercase">To my Master<br/>
      <span class="larger">Camoens:</span></p>
      <p>(<i lang="it">Tu se’ lo mio maestro, e ’l mio autore</i>).</p>
    </header>

    <blockquote class="poetry"><div>
      <p>
        <span>Great Pilgrim-poet of the Sea and Land;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thou life-long sport of Fortune’s ficklest will;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Doomed to all human and inhuman ill,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Despite thy lover-heart, thy hero-hand:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Enrollèd by thy pen what marv’ellous band</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Of god-like Forms thy golden pages fill;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Love, Honour, Justice, Valour, Glory thrill</span>
        <br/>
        <span>The Soul, obedient to thy strong command:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Amid the Prophets highest sits the Bard,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">At once Revealer of the Heav’en and Earth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>To Heav’en the guide, of Earth the noblest guard;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>And, ’mid the Poets thine the peerless worth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Whose glorious song, thy Genius’ sole reward,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Bids all the Ages, Camoens! bless thy birth.</span>
      </p>
      <cite><abbr title="Richard Francis Burton">R. F. B.</abbr></cite>
      </div></blockquote>
  </div>
  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

  <section id="preface">

    <h2>Preface.</h2>

    <p>The most pleasing literary labour of my life has been to translate “The
      Lusiads.” One of my highest aims has been to produce a translation
      which shall associate my name, not unpleasantly, with that of “my
      master, Camoens.”</p>

    <p>Those who favour me by reading this version are spared the long recital
      of why, how, and when Portugal’s Maro became to me the perfection of a
      traveller’s study. The first and chiefest charm was, doubtless, that
      of the Man. A wayfarer and voyager from his youth; a soldier, somewhat
      turbulent withal, wounded and blamed for his wounds; a moralist, a
      humourist, a satirist, and, consequently, no favourite with King
      Demos; a reverent and religious spirit after his own fashion (somewhat
      “Renaissance,” poetic, and Pagan), by no means after the fashion of
      others; an outspoken, truth-telling, lucre-despising writer; a public
      servant whose motto was,—strange to say,—<em>Honour, not Honours</em>;
      a doughty Sword and yet doughtier Pen; a type <span class="pagenum" id="Page_xii">[Pg xii]</span>of the chivalrous
      age;
      a patriot of the purest water, so jealous of his Country’s good fame
      that nothing would satisfy him but to see the world bow before her
      perfections; a genius, the first and foremost of his day, who died in
      the direst poverty and distress; such in merest outline was the Man,
      and such was the Life which won the fondest and liveliest sympathies of
      the translator.</p>

      <blockquote class="poetry"><div>
        <p class="italics" lang="pt">
          <span>Poetas por poetas sejam lidos;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Sejam só por poetas explicadas</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Suas obras divinas;</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>(Still by the Poets be the Poets read</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Only be render’d by the Poet’s tongue</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Their works divine);</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>

    <p class="continued">writes Manuel Corrêa. Mickle expresses the sentiment with more brevity
      and equal point: None but a poet can translate a poet; and Coleridge
      assigns to a poet the property of explaining a poet. Let me add that
      none but a traveller can do justice to a traveller. And it so happens
      that most of my wanderings have unconsciously formed a running and
      realistic commentary upon “The Lusiads.” I have not only visited almost
      every place named in the Epos of Commerce, in many I have spent months
      and even years. The Arch-poet of Portugal paints from the life, he
      has also the insight which we call introvision; he sees with <span class="pagenum" id="Page_xiii">[Pg
        xiii]</span>exact
      eyes where others are purblind or blind. Only they who have personally
      studied the originals of his pictures can appreciate their perfect
      combination of fidelity and realism with Fancy and Idealism. Here it is
      that the traveller-translator may do good service with his specialty.</p>

    <p>Again, like Boccaccio, Camoens reflects the <i lang="la">Lux ex Oriente</i>.
      There is a perfume of the East in everything he writes of the East:
      we find in his song much of its havock and all its splendour.
      Oriental-like, he delights in the Pathetic Fallacy; to lavish upon
      inanimates the attributes of animate sensation. Here again, the student
      of things Eastern, the “practical Orientalist,” may be useful by
      drawing attention to points which escape the European, however learned.</p>

    <p>There are many translators of Camoens yet to come. We are an ephemeral
      race, each one struggling to trample down his elder brother, like the
      Simoniacal Popes in the Malebolge-pit. My first excuse for adding to
      the half-dozen translations in the field, must be my long studies,
      geographical and anthropological: I can at least spare future writers
      the pains and penalties of saddling the exactest of poets with bad
      ethnology and worse topography. These may be small matters, but in
      local colouring every touch tells.</p>

    <p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_xiv">[Pg xiv]</span></p>

    <p>My chief qualifications for the task, however, are a thorough
      appreciation of the Poem and a hearty admiration for the Poet whom I
      learned to love in proportion as I learned to know him. His Lusiads has
      been described as <i lang="fr">une lecture saine et fortifiante</i>. I would say
      far more. The Singer’s gracious and noble thoughts are reviving as the
      champagne-air of the mountain-top. His verse has the true heroic ring
      of such old ballads as:—</p>

      <blockquote class="poetry" lang="fr"><div>
        <p class="italics">
          <span>S’en assaut viens, devant ta lance,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i1">En mine, en échelle, en tous lieux,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>En prouesse les bons avance,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i1">Ta dame t’en aimera mieux.</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>

    <p class="continued">And with this love and sympathy of mine mingles not a little gratitude.
      During how many hopeless days and sleepless nights Camoens was my
      companion, my consoler, my friend;—on board raft and canoe; sailer and
      steamer; on the camel and the mule; under the tent and the jungle-tree;
      upon the fire-peak and the snow-peak; on the Prairie, the Campo, the
      Steppe, the Desert!</p>

    <p>Where no conversable being can be found within a march of months;
      and when the hot blood of youth courses through the brain, Ennui and
      Nostalgia are readily bred, while both are fatal to the Explorer’s
      <span class="pagenum" id="Page_xv">[Pg xv]</span>full success. And, preferring to all softer lines the hard life
      of
      Discovery-travel:—
    </p>

    <blockquote class="poetry"><div>
      <p>
        <span>Where things that own not man’s dominion dwell,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i1">Where foot of mortal man hath never been;—</span>
      </p>
    </div></blockquote>

    <p class="continued">a career which combines cultivation and education with that resistless
      charm, that poetry-passion of the Unknown; whose joy of mere motion
      lightens all sorrows and disappointments; which aids, by commune with
      Nature, the proper study of Mankind; which enlarges the mental view as
      the hill-head broadens the horizon; which made Julian a saint, Khizr a
      prophet, and Odin a god: this <em>Reiselust</em>, I say, being my ruling
      passion, compelled me to seek a talisman against homesickness and the
      nervous troubles which learned men call Phrenalgia and Autophobia.</p>

    <p>I found this talisman in Camoens.</p>

    <p>And, if it be true that by virtue of his perfect affection and
      veneration for Homer, whom he loved as a second self, Chapman was
      enabled to reflect a something of the old Greek’s magic force and
      fire, I also may be permitted to hope that complete sympathy with my
      Poet will enable me to present the public with a copy not unworthy of
      Camoens’ immortal work.</p>

    <p>After all, to speak without undue modesty, my most <span class="pagenum" id="Page_xvi">[Pg xvi]</span>cogent
      reason
      for
      printing this translation of my Master is, simply because I prefer it
      to all that have appeared. Others will think otherwise; and there is
      a Judge from whose sentence lies no present appeal. I have spared no
      labour on the work; I have satisfied myself if not <i lang="fr">Malebouche</i>;
      and I repeat my motto: <i lang="it">poco spero, nulla chiedo</i>. If a
      concurrence of adverse trifles prevent my being appreciated now, the
      day will come, haply somewhat late, when men will praise what they now
      pass by.</p>

      <footer>
        <p class="uppercase right">
          <cite class="normal">Richard Francis Burton.</cite>
        </p>
        <p><span class="smcap">Cairo</span>, <i>May 1, 1880</i>.</p>
     </footer>

  </section>
  <section id="halftitlepage">

    <header>
      <h2>Os Lusiadas</h2>
      <p class="center larger uppercase">(The Lusiads).</p>
    </header>

  </section>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

  <section id="canto-i">
      <h3>Canto I.</h3>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-i-argument">
      <h4>Argument<br/>
        of the First Canto.</h4>

        <p class="continued">The Portugueze navigate the Eastern Seas: The Gods hold their Council:
        Bacchus opposeth himself to this navigation: Venus and Mars favour the
        navigators: They arrive at Mozambíque, the Governor whereof attempteth
        to destroy them: Encounter and first military Action of our People with
        the Gentiles: They weigh anchor; and, passing Quiloa, they ride in the
        roadstead of Mombasah.</p>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-i-another-argument">

      <h4>Another Argument.</h4>

      <blockquote class="poetry italics"><div>
        <p>
          <span>Fazem Councilio os deoses na alta Côrte,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Oppoem-se Baccho á Lusitana gente,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Favorece-a Venus, e Mavorte,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>E em Moçambique lança o ferreo dente:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Depois de aqui mostrar seu braço forte,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Destruindo, e matando juntamente,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Torna as partes buscar da roxa Aurora,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>E chegando a Mombaça surge fora.</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>

      <table class="table-poetry">
        <tbody>
          <tr>
            <td>The Gods hold council Heaven’s high court within,</td>
            <td class="right">(20–41)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Bacchus our Lusian braves to thwart doth seek</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(73–81)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Who meed of Mars, and grace of Venus gain,</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Till cast the ferreous tooth in Mozambíque:</td>
            <td/>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Thence, when their arm of pow’r display’d had been,</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(85)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Death and destruction on the foe to wreak;</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Fareth the fleet where red Aurora bideth;</td>
            <td/>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>And, reach’d Mombasah-town, outside it rideth.</td>
            <td class="right">(103)</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-i-body">

      <h4>Canto I.</h4>

      <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

        <p>
          <span>The feats of Arms, and famed heroick Host,<span class="linenum">1</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">from occidental Lusitanian strand,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">who o’er the waters ne’er by seaman crost,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">farèd beyond the Taprobáne-land,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-1" id="noteref-1">[1]</a></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">forceful in perils and in battle-post,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">with more than promised force of mortal hard;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and in the regions of a distant race</span>
          <br/>
          <span>rear’d a new throne so haught in Pride of Place:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>And, eke, the Kings of mem’ory grand and glorious,<span class="linenum">2</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">who hied them Holy Faith and Reign to spread,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">converting, conquering, and in lands notorious,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Africk and Asia, devastation made;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">nor less the Lieges who by deeds memorious</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">brake from the doom that binds the vulgar dead;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>my song would sound o’er Earth’s extremest part</span>
          <br/>
          <span>were mine the genius, mine the Poet’s art.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Cease the sage Grecian, and the Man of Troy <span class="linenum">3</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_6">[Pg 6]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to vaunt long Voyage made in bygone day:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Cease Alexander, Trajan cease to ’joy</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the fame of vict’ories that have pass’d away:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The noble Lusian’s stouter breast sing I,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whom Mars and Neptune dared not disobey:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Cease all that antique Muse hath sung, for now</span>
          <br/>
          <span>a better Brav’ry rears its bolder brow.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>And you, my Tagian Nymphs,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-2" id="noteref-2">[2]</a> who
            have create<span class="linenum">4</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">in me new purpose with new genius firing;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">if ’twas my joy whilere to celebrate</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">your founts and stream my humble song inspiring;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-3" id="noteref-3">[3]</a></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Oh! lend me here a noble strain elate,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">a style grandiloquent that flows untiring;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>so shall Apollo for your waves ordain ye</span>
          <br/>
          <span>in name and fame ne’er envy Hippokréné.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Grant me sonorous accents, fire-abounding,<span class="linenum">5</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">now serves ne peasant’s pipe, ne rustick reed;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">but blast of trumpet, long and loud resounding,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">that ’flameth heart and hue to fiery deed:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Grant me high strains to suit their Gestes astounding,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">your Sons, who aided Mars in martial need;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>that o’er the world be sung the glorious song,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>if theme so lofty may to verse belong.</span>
</p>
<p>
<span>And Thou! O goodly omen’d trust, all-dear<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-4" id="noteref-4">[4]</a> <span class="linenum">6</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_7">[Pg 7]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to Lusitania’s olden liberty,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whereon assurèd esperance we rear</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">enforced to see our frail Christianity:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Thou, O new terror to the Moorish spear,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the fated marvel of our century,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>to govern worlds of men by God so given,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>that the world’s best be given to God and Heaven:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Thou young, then tender, ever-flourishing bough,<span class="linenum">7</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">true scion of tree by <span class="smcap">Christ</span> belovèd
            more,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">than aught that Occident did ever know,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">“Cæsarian” or “Most Christian” styled before:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Look on thy ’scutcheon, and behold it show</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the present Vict’ory long past ages bore;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Arms which He gave and made thine own to be</span>
          <br/>
          <span>by Him assumèd on the fatal tree:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-5" id="noteref-5">[5]</a></span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Thou, mighty Sovran! o’er whose lofty reign<span class="linenum">8</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the rising Sun rains earliest smile of light;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">sees it from middle firmamental plain;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and sights it sinking on the breast of Night:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Thou, whom we hope to hail the blight, the bane</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of the dishonour’d Ishmaëlitish knight;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and Orient Turk, and Gentoo-misbeliever</span>
          <br/>
          <span>that drinks the liquor of the Sacred River:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-6" id="noteref-6">[6]</a></span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Incline awhile, I pray, that majesty <span class="linenum">9</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_8">[Pg 8]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">which in thy tender years I see thus ample,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">E’en now prefiguring full maturity</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">that shall be shrin’d in Fame’s eternal temple:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Those royal eyne that beam benignity</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">bend on low earth: Behold a new ensample</span>
          <br/>
          <span>of hero hearts with patriot pride inflamèd,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>in number’d verses manifold proclaimèd.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Thou shalt see Love of Land that ne’er shall own<span class="linenum">10</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">lust of vile lucre; soaring towards th’ Eternal:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">For ’tis no light ambition to be known</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">th’ acclaimèd herald of my nest paternal.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Hear; thou shalt see the great names greater grown</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of Vavasors who hail thee Lord Supernal:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>So shalt thou judge which were the higher station,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>King of the world or Lord of such a nation.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Hark; for with vauntings vain thou shalt not view<span class="linenum">11</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">phantastical, fictitious, lying deed</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of lieges lauded, as strange Muses do,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">seeking their fond and foolish pride to feed:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Thine acts so forceful are, told simply true,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">all fabled, dreamy feats they far exceed;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>exceeding Rodomont, and Ruggiero vain,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and Roland<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-7" id="noteref-7">[7]</a> haply born of
            Poet’s
            brain.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>For these I give thee a Nuno, fierce in fight, <span class="linenum">12</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_9">[Pg 9]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">who for his King and Country freely bled;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">an Egas and a Fuas;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-8" id="noteref-8">[8]</a>
            fain I might</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">for them my lay with harp Homeric wed!</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">For the twelve peerless Peers again I cite</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the Twelve of England by Magriço led:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Nay, more, I give thee Gama’s noble name,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>who for himself claims all Æneas’ fame.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>And if in change for royal Charles of France,<span class="linenum">13</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">or rivalling Cæsar’s mem’ories thou wouldst trow,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the first Afonso see, whose conque’ring lance</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">lays highest boast of stranger glories low:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">See him who left his realm th’ inheritance</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">fair Safety, born of wars that crusht the foe:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>That other John, a knight no fear deter’d,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>the fourth and fifth Afonso, and the third.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Nor shall they silent in my song remain,<span class="linenum">14</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">they who in regions there where Dawns arise,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">by Acts of Arms such glories toil’d to gain,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">where thine unvanquisht flag for ever flies,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Pacheco, brave of braves; th’ Almeidas twain,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whom Tagus mourns with ever-weeping eyes;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>dread Albuquerque, Castro stark and brave,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>with more, the victors of the very grave.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But, singing these, of thee I may not sing, <span class="linenum">15</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_10">[Pg 10]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">O King sublime! such theme I fain must fear.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Take of thy reign the reins, so shall my King</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">create a poesy new to mortal ear:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">E’en now the mighty burthen hear I ring</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">(and speed its terrors over all the sphere!)</span>
          <br/>
          <span>of sing’ular prowess, War’s own prodigies,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>in Africk regions and on Orient seas.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Casteth on thee the Moor eyne cold with fright,<span class="linenum">16</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">in whom his coming doom he views designèd:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The barb’rous Gentoo, sole to see thy sight</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">yields to thy yoke the neck e’en now inclinèd;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Tethys, of azure seas the sovran right,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">her realm, in dowry hath to thee resignèd;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and, by thy noble tender beauty won,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>would bribe and buy thee to become her son.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>In thee from high Olympick halls behold<span class="linenum">17</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">themselves, thy grandsires’ sprites; far-famèd pair;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-9" id="noteref-9">[9]</a></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">this clad in Peacetide’s angel-robe of gold,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">that crimson-hued with paint of battle-glare:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">By thee they hope to see their tale twice told,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">their lofty memo’ries live again; and there,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>when Time thy years shall end, for thee they ’sign</span>
          <br/>
          <span>a seat where soareth Fame’s eternal shrine.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But, sithence antient Time slow minutes by <span class="linenum">18</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_11">[Pg 11]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">ere ruled the Peoples who desire such boon;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">bend on my novel rashness favouring eye,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">that these my verses may become thine own:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">So shalt thou see thine Argonauts o’erfly</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">yon salty argent, when they see it shown</span>
          <br/>
          <span>thou seest their labours on the raging sea:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Learn even now invok’d of man to be.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-10" id="noteref-10">[10]</a></span>
        </p>
        <hr/>
        <p>
          <span>They walked the water’s vasty breadth of blue,<span class="linenum">19</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">parting the restless billows on their way;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">fair favouring breezes breathèd soft and true,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the bellying canvas bulging in their play:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The seas were sprent with foam of creamy hue,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">flashing where’er the Prows wide open lay</span>
          <br/>
          <span>the sacred spaces of that ocean-plain</span>
          <br/>
          <span>where Proteus’ cattle cleave his own domain:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>When they who hold Olympick luminous height,<span class="linenum">20</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the Gods and Governors of our human race,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">convened in glorious conclave, all unite</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the coming course of Eastern things to trace:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Treading the glassy dome of lovely light,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">along the Milky Way conjoint they pace,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>gather’d together at the Thunderer’s hest,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and by old Atlas’ gentle grandson prest.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>They leave the reg’iment of the Firm’aments seven, <span class="linenum">21</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_12">[Pg
              12]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to them committed by his high command,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">his pow’r sublime whose thoughtful will hath given</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Order to skies, and angry seas, and land:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Then instant gather in th’ assize of Heaven</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">those who are throned on far Arcturus’ strand,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and those that Auster rule, and Orient tides,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>where springs Aurora and clear Phœbus hides.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Reposèd there the Sire sublime and digne,<span class="linenum">22</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">vibrates whose hand the fierce Vulcanian ray,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">on seat of starry splendour crystalline,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">grand in his lofty gest of sovran sway:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Respirèd from his brow such air divine,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">that to divine could change dull human clay;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>bearing the crown and sceptre rutilant,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>of clearer stone than clearest diamant.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>On sparkling seats, with marquetry inlaid<span class="linenum">23</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of gold and pearl-work, sat in lower state</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the minor Godheads, marshall’d and array’d,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">e’en as demanded reason, rank, and rate:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Highest the seniors of most honour’d grade;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">lower adown the lower Deities sate:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>When thus high Jove the deathless throng addrest</span>
          <br/>
          <span>with awful accents, dealing gravest hest:—</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Immortal Peoples of the starlit Pole, <span class="linenum">24</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_13">[Pg 13]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whose seats adorn this constellated sphere;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">if the stout Race of valour-breathing soul</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">from Lusus springing still to thought be dear,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Your high Intelligences lief unroll</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the writ of mighty Fate: her will is clear,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>this Deed to cold Oblivion’s shade shall doom</span>
          <br/>
          <span>the fame of Persia, ’Assyria, Greece, and Rome.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“To them ’twas erst, and well you wot it, given,<span class="linenum">25</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">albeit a Pow’r so single, simple, small,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to see the doughty Moor from ’trenchments driven</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">where gentle Tagus feeds and floods the vale:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Then with the dreadful Spaniard have they striven,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">by boon of Heav’n serene ne’er known to fail;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and urged their fortune’s ever-glorious claim</span>
          <br/>
          <span>to victor-trophies hung in fane of Fame.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Godheads! I leave that antique fame unsaid,<span class="linenum">26</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">reft from the race of Romulus their foes;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">when, by their warrior Viriátus led,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">so high in Roman wars their names arose:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Eke leave I mem’ries which to meritèd</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Honour obligèd when for chief they chose</span>
          <br/>
          <span>that perfect Captain, erst a peregrine foe,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>who feign’d a Dæmon in his milk-white Doe.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-11" id="noteref-11">[11]</a></span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Now well you see how steel’d their souls to steer <span class="linenum">27</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_14">[Pg
              14]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">a fragile barque through dubious wat’ery way,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">by paths unused, and holding nought in fear</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Notus and Afer’s force, wax bolder they:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">How whilom ev’ry region left arear,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">where suns or shorten or draw long the day,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>on wings of stubborn will these men be borne</span>
          <br/>
          <span>to sight the cradles of the nascent Morn.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Promised them Fate’s eternal covenant,<span class="linenum">28</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whose high commandments none shall dare despise,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">for years full many they shall rule th’ extent</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of seas that see the ruddy suns arise.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">On wavy wastes hard winter have they spent;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">o’erworked they come by travailing emprize;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>’twere meet we show them, thus it seemeth me,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>the fair new region which they fain would see.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And as their valour, so you trow, defied<span class="linenum">29</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">on aspe’rous voyage cruel harm and sore,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">so many changing skies their manhood tried,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">such climes where storm-winds blow and billows roar;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">my sov’ereign mandate ’tis, be theirs to ride</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">in friendly haven, on the Blackmoor shore;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>whence shall the weary Fleet, with ev’ery need</span>
          <br/>
          <span>garnisht, once more her long-drawn voyage speed.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Thus hearing Jupiter’s decree pronouncèd, <span class="linenum">30</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_15">[Pg 15]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">each God responsive spoke, in order due,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">contrasting judgment one and all announcèd</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">giving and taking various divers view.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">But Father Bacchus then and there renouncèd,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">homage to Jove’s command, who right well knew</span>
          <br/>
          <span>his deeds on Orient-lond would leave no trace,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>were furth’erance granted to the Lusian race.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The Fatal Sisters he had heard declare,<span class="linenum">31</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">how from Hispanian bounds a hero-band</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">should span the pathless deep, and nought should spare</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">wherever Doris batheth Indian strand:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Should with new victo’ries eve’ry deed out-dare</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">done or by his or other stranger hand:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Profound he sorrows lest he lose the glory,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>the name still cel’ebrate in the Nyssan story.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>He sees, while Indus he of yore hath tamèd,<span class="linenum">32</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Fortune or favou’ring chance had aye denied</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to hear him India’s conqueror acclaimèd</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">by bardic men who drain Parnassus’ tide:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">And now he dreadeth lest a name so famèd</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">be doomed for ever in the mire to hide</span>
          <br/>
          <span>of Lethe-fountain, if on Inde debark</span>
          <br/>
          <span>these vagueing Portingalls so strong and stark.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But him opposèd Venus, lovely fair, <span class="linenum">33</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_16">[Pg 16]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whose heart her Lusian sons had won the more,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">since in them seen the qualities high and rare,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the gifts that deckt her Romans dear of yore:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The heart of valour, and the potent star,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whose splendour dazzled Tingitánan shore;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and e’en the musick of their speech appears</span>
          <br/>
          <span>soft bastard Latin to her loving ears.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>These causes movèd Cytheréa’s sprite;<span class="linenum">34</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and more when learnt she that the Fates intendèd</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the Queen of Beauty should be glorious hight</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">where’er their warrior sway her sons extendèd.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Thus He, who fearèd future stain and blight,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and She, whose heart to honours high pretended</span>
          <br/>
          <span>urge the debate in obstinate strife remaining;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>with fav’ouring friends each rival right maintaining:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>As the fierce South, or Boreas in the shade<span class="linenum">35</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of sylvan upland where the tree-boles cluster,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the branches shatt’ering crash through glooming glade</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">with horrid hurry and infuriate fluster:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Roars all the mountain, Echo moans in dread;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">torn is the leaf’ery, hill-heads boil and bluster:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Such gusty tumults rise amid the Gods</span>
          <br/>
          <span>within Olympus’ consecrate abodes.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But Mars, for ever wont t’espouse the part <span class="linenum">36</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_17">[Pg 17]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of his dear Goddess, whatsoe’er the case;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">or for old love that flicker’d in his heart,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">or for the merits of her fighting race;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">forth from the Gods upsprang with sudden start:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Stern melancholy markt his gest and face;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>the pond’erous pavoise from his gorget hung</span>
          <br/>
          <span>behind his shoulders full of wrath he flung!</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>His beavoir’d helmet of the diamant stone<span class="linenum">37</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">opeing a little, of his strength right sure,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">his sense to speak he strode and stood alone</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Jupiter facing, armèd, dour and dure:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Then with hard pen’etrant blow he bore adown</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">his steely spear-heel on the pavement pure;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>quakèd the welkin; and Apollo’s ray</span>
          <br/>
          <span>waxt somewhat wan as though by cold dismay.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>And thus:—“Omnipo’tent Sire! whose awful reign<span class="linenum">38</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">perforce obeyeth all thy pow’er hath made;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">if these, who seek a new half-world to gain,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whose deeds of brav’ery hast with love survey’d,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">thou wouldst not guerdon with a shame and stain,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">that erst were favoured through the years that fade</span>
          <br/>
          <span>listen no longer thou, sole Judge direct,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>to glozing reasons all we Gods suspect:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“For, did not Reason in this matter show <span class="linenum">39</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_18">[Pg 18]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">herself the victim of unmeasure’d fear,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">better beseems it Bacchus love bestow</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">on Lusus’ children, once his comrade dear:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">But, let this vain and splen’etick purpose go,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">since bred of evil stomach; for ’tis clear</span>
          <br/>
          <span>that alien envy ne’er shall turn to woes</span>
          <br/>
          <span>what weal men merit, and the Gods dispose.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And thou, O Sire of surest constancy!<span class="linenum">40</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">from the determine’d purpose of thy mind</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">turn thee not backwards; weakness ’twere in thee</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">now to desist thee from the thing design’d.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Send forth thine agile herald, Mercury,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">fleeter than trimmèd shaft, or winnowing wind,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and show some happy hythe where Rest shall joy</span>
          <br/>
          <span>all weary breasts with news of India nigh.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>As thus he said, the Sire of sov’ereign might<span class="linenum">41</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">assented, nodding grave his awful head</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to Mars’ opinion, ever fain of fight,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and o’er the Council show’ers of nectar shed.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The Galaxy, the pathway glowing bright,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the Deities all disparting rose to tread;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>royal obeisance making, and the road</span>
          <br/>
          <span>each took returning to his own abode.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>While thus it happens in th’ æthereal reign,— <span class="linenum">42</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_19">[Pg 19]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Omnipotent Olympick height serene,—</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the warrior People cut the curvèd main</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Austral and Oriental course between;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">where fronts the face of Æthiopick plain</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">far-famed Saint Lawrence Isle<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-12" id="noteref-12">[12]</a>; Sol’s brightest sheen</span>
          <br/>
          <span>upon the water-deities rainèd fire,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>who, changed to fishes, ’scaped Typhœus’ ire.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The wafting winds so winsome urged their way,<span class="linenum">43</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">As though the smiling heav’ens dear friends defended;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">serene the welkin, and the lucid day</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">dawn’ed sans a cloud nor aught of risk portended:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Astern the leek-green point of Prasum<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-13" id="noteref-13">[13]</a> lay</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">an olden name where Æthiop coast extended;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>when Ocean op’ening broad a vista show’d</span>
          <br/>
          <span>of islets fondled by the circling flood.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Vasco da Gama, valiant Capitayne,<span class="linenum">44</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">for derring-do the noblest volunteer,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of not’able courage and of noble strain,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whom smile of constant Fortune loved to cheer;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">seeth no reason why he should remain</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">where shows the shore-line desert, dark and drear:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Once more determined he to tempt the sea;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>but as he willèd Fortune nill’ed it be.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>For look! appeareth a flotilla yonder, <span class="linenum">45</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_20">[Pg 20]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">mosquito-craft that cleave the rolling tide;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and with their flowing sails the surges sunder,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">from the small island next the cont’inent side:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The crews rejoicing, in their hope and wonder</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">could gaze on naught save what their hearts had joy’d.</span>
          <br/>
          <span>“Who may be these?” each ask’ed him in amaze;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>“What law be theirs, what ruler, what their ways?”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The boats appearèd in a manner new<span class="linenum">46</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">long-built and narrow-beamed, for swiftness plan’d;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">mats were the wings wherewith they lightly flew</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">from certain palm-fronds wove by cunning hand:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The people wore that veritable hue,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Phaëton’s boon to many a burning land,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>when work’ed his rashness on the world such ills:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>So Padus knows and Lampethusa feels.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>They come costumèd all in cotton gear,<span class="linenum">47</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of hues contrasting, stripèd, chequed, and white;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">one zone-girt cloth around the waist they wear,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">other they throw on back in airy plight:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Above the waist-band each brown form is bare;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">dag-targe and matchet<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-14" id="noteref-14">[14]</a> are their arms of fight:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Scull-cap on head; and, as they wend their way,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>shriek shrilly shawms, and harsh-voiced trumpets bray.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Waving their raiment and their hands they signèd <span class="linenum">48</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_21">[Pg
              21]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the Lusitanian folk to wait awhile:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">but our light Prores their course had now inclinèd</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to strike where shelter’d by the nearest isle:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Soldiers and sailors in one toil conjoinèd</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">as though were here the period of their toil:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>They take in sail, and strike the lofty spar,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and Ocean, anchor-smit, froths high in air.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Nor had they anchor’d, when the stranger race<span class="linenum">49</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the shrouds upswarming ready footing gainèd;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">joyous they cluster glad of gest and face;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">our Captain gracious greeting gives unfeignèd.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">He bids incontinent the board to grace</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">with vinous liquor first Lyæus drainèd;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>they crown the chrystal cups, the proffer’d wine</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Phaëton’s scorchèd folk nowise decline.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Afeasting cheery all the guests enquirèd<span class="linenum">50</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">in Arab language, Whence had come their hosts?</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Who were they? Where their land? What they desirèd?</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">What seas their keels had cut and conn’d what coasts?</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The valiant Lusians answered with requirèd</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">discretion, and eschewing foolish boasts,—</span>
          <br/>
          <span>“We are the Occidental Portughuese;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>And, seeking Orient lands, we sail the seas.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“We now have coasted, running Ocean o’er, <span class="linenum">51</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_22">[Pg 22]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Callisto’s Arctick and th’ Antarctick lands;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">our course hath circled Africk’s winding shore;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">strange skies exploring and yet stranger strands:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Ours is a potent King, loved evermore,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and we so prize his praise and his commands,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>with mien right joyful, not the sea and sky,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>but even Ach’eron Lake we dare defy.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And wend we seeking by his royal will<span class="linenum">52</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">where farthest Indus wat’ereth Eastern plain:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">For him through wild wide waves we hoist the sail,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">where ugly seals and orcs deform the Main.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">But Reason tells us that ye may not fail</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to answer, an of Truth your souls be fain,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Who are ye? What this land wherein ye wone?</span>
          <br/>
          <span>And sign of India is to you beknown?”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“We live,” an island-man thus answ’ering said,<span class="linenum">53</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">“aliens in land and law and eke in blood;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">where native races are by nature bred,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">a lawless, loutish, and unreasoning brood.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">We hold his certain Law, that Holy Seed,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">springing from Abram’s loins, who hath subdued</span>
          <br/>
          <span>the nations subject to his sign’ory true;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>by sire a Gentile and by mother Jew.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-15" id="noteref-15">[15]</a></span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“This little island, where we now abide, <span class="linenum">54</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_23">[Pg 23]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of all this seaboard is the one sure place</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">for ev’ery merchantman that stems the tide,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">from Quiloa<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-16" id="noteref-16">[16]</a> or
            Sofálah or Mombas:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Here, as ’tis necessary, long we’ve tried</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to house and home us, like its proper race:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>In fine to find you with the facts you seek,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>man calls our little island ‘Mozambíque.’</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And, as far-faring now ye come to view<span class="linenum">55</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Indic Hydaspes and his burning board,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">hence ye shall bear a Pilot, sure and true,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whose skill the safest guidance shall afford:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">’Twere also well, ere you your toils renew,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">vittaile to ship, and let our island-lord,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>who governeth this land, his guests behold,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and stock with needed store each empty hold.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>His speech thus spake the Moor, and took his leave,<span class="linenum">56</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">he and his meiny where the bátels lay:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">formal farewells to chief and crews he gave,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">exchanging congees with due courtesy.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Now weary Phœbus in the western wave</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">had stalled the chrystal chariot of the Day,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and gave his bright-brow’d sister charge t’ illume</span>
          <br/>
          <span>the vast of Earth while lasted nightly gloom.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Aboard the way-worn Fleet blithe sped the night <span class="linenum">57</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_24">[Pg
              24]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">in careless joyaunce recking nought of fear;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">for the far land which long had ’scaped their sight</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">at length gave tidings, and at last lay near.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Now to take notice ’gins each curious wight</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of the strange people’s manners, ways, and gear,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and much they marvell’ed how the sect misguided</span>
          <br/>
          <span>o’er Earth’s broad surface far and wide abided.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Rained Luna’s radiance shedding rutilant showers<span class="linenum">58</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">o’er Neptune’s wavelets tipt with silver sheen:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">And like the May-mead fleckt with daisy flowers</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">sprent with its sparkling stars the sky was seen:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The blust’ring storm-winds slept in distant bowers,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Antres obscure in regions peregrine;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>yet on th’ Armada’s decks a weapon’d guard</span>
          <br/>
          <span>kept, as so long they wont, good watch and ward.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But when Aurora with her marquetry<span class="linenum">59</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">’gan strew the glorious honours of her head</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">o’er the clear Heav’ens, and oped the ruddy way</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to bright Hyperion rising from his bed;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">lief is the Fleet to dress in brave array</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of flags, and goodly awnings gay to spread,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>that all may greet with holiday and hail</span>
          <br/>
          <span>that island-lord who came with flowing sail.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>He came right merrily o’er the Main, and sought <span class="linenum">60</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_25">[Pg
              25]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to view our nimble Lusitanian fleet;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">bringing his country-cates, for ’twas his thought</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">in the fierce foreigner perchance to meet</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the race inhuman, which hath ever fought</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to change its Caspian caves for happier seat</span>
          <br/>
          <span>in Asian cont’inent; and, by Will Divine,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>of rule imperial robbèd Constantine.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-17" id="noteref-17">[17]</a></span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>With glad reception our Commander meets<span class="linenum">61</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the Moorish chieftain and his whole convóy;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whom with a gift of richest gear he greets</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whereof a store was shipped for such employ:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">He gives him rich conserves, he gives, rare treats,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the liquors hot which fill man’s heart with joy.</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Good be the gifts the Moor contented thinks,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>but more the sweetmeats prizes, most the drinks.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The sailor-people sprung from Lusus’ blood<span class="linenum">62</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">in wond’ering clusters to the ratlines clung;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">noting the stranger’s novel mode and mood</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">with his so barb’arous and perplexèd tongue.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-18" id="noteref-18">[18]</a></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Sometime the wily Moor confusèd stood</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">eyeing the garb, the hue, the fleet, the throng;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and asked, with questions manifold assailing,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>if they from Turkey-land, perchance, were hailing.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>He further tells them how he longs to see <span class="linenum">63</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_26">[Pg 26]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">what books their credence, law and faith contain;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">if these conforming with his own agree</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">or were, as well he ween’d, of Christian grain:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Nay more, that hidden naught from him may be,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">he prayed the Captain would be pleased t’ ordain</span>
          <br/>
          <span>that be displayèd every puissant arm</span>
          <br/>
          <span>wherewith the for’eigners work their foemen harm.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>To this the doughty Chieftain deals reply,<span class="linenum">64</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">through one that óbscure jargon knowing well:—</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">“Illustrious Signior! I fain will try</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">all of ourselves, our arms, our creed to tell.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Nor of the country, kith or kin am I</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of irksome races that in Turkey dwell;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>my home is warlike Europe and I wend</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Seeking the far-famed lands of farthest Inde.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“I hold the law of One by worlds obey’d,<span class="linenum">65</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">by visible things and things invisible;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">He who the hemispheres from naught hath made,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">with sentient things and things insensible:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Who with vitup’erate foul reproach bewray’d</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">was doomed to suffer death insufferable;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>And who, in fine, by Heav’n to Earth was given,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>that man through Him might rise from Earth to Heaven.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Of this <span class="smcap">God-man<span class="pagenum" id="Page_27">[Pg 27]</span></span> most
            highest, infinite,
           <span class="linenum">66</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The books thou wouldst behold I have not brought;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">we stand excused of bringing what men write</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">on paper, when in sprite ’tis writ and wrought.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">But an with weapons wouldst refresh thy sight,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">As thou hast askèd, I deny thee nought;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>A friend to friends I show them; and I vow</span>
          <br/>
          <span>ne’er wouldst be shown their temper as my foe.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>This said, he bids his armourers diligent<span class="linenum">67</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">bring arms and armour for the Moorman viewer:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Come sheeny harness, corselets lucident,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the fine-wove mail-coat and plate-armour sure;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">shields decorate with ’scutcheons different,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">bullets and spingards, th’ ice-brook’s temper pure;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>bows, quivers furnisht with the grinded pile,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>the sharp-edged partizan, the good brown bill:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Brought are the fiery bombs, while they prepare<span class="linenum">68</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">sulph’urous stink-pots and grenades of fire:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">But them of Vulcan biddeth he to spare</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">their dread artill’ery belching flames in ire;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">naught did that gentle gen’erous spirit care</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">with fear the few and fearful folk t’ inspire,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and right his reas’oning: ’Twere a boast too cheap</span>
          <br/>
          <span>to play the Lyon on the seely Sheep.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But from whate’er th’ observant Moorman heard, <span class="linenum">69</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_28">[Pg
              28]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and from whate’er his prying glance could see,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">a settled deadly hate his spirit stir’d,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and evil crave of treach’erous cowardrie:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">No sign of change he showed in gest or word;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">but with a gay and gallant feigning he</span>
          <br/>
          <span>vowèd in looks and words to treat them fair,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>till deeds his daring purpose could declare.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The Captain prayed him Pilots to purvey,<span class="linenum">70</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">his Squadron far as Indian shore to guide;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">so should with wealthy hire and worthy pay</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the labourer’s toil and moil be gratified.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Promised the Moorman sorely led astray</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">by ven’omous heart and with such poyson’d pride,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>that Death in place of Pilot, at that hour,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>his hand had given an it had the power.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>So hot that hatred, sharp that enmity,<span class="linenum">71</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">wherewith his spirit ’gainst his guests was fraught,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">that knew them followers of that verity</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">by the Seed of David to our fathers taught.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Oh darkling secret of Eternity,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whereof man’s judgment may encompass naught!</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Why should they never lack perfidious foe,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>who such fair symbols of Thy friendship show?</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>At length, surrounded by his crafty crew, <span class="linenum">72</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_29">[Pg 29]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the treachour Moorman from our ships took leave,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">on all bestowing bel-accoyle untrue,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">with fair, glad phrase designèd to deceive.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Soon o’er the narrow way his barquelets flew;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and, landing safely from Neptunian wave,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>the Moorman, whom his suite obsequious greet,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>regains his homestead and his wonted seat.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>From Æther’s radiant seat Thebes’ mighty son,<span class="linenum">73</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The God two-mother’d, sprung from father-thigh,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">seeing the Lusian host had straight begun</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the Moorman’s hate and horror to defy,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">fixt ev’ery project some foul feat upon,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">by which the stranger host might surely die:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>And while the plot his spirit importunèd,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>thus in soliloquy the God communèd:—</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Fate hath determinèd in olden time,<span class="linenum">74</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">that conquests, fit the self of Fame t’ outface,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">these Portingalls shall claim in ev’ery clime</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">where India rears her war-ennobled race:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Shall only I, the son of sire sublime,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">I, whom such gen’erous gifts and guerdons grace,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>suffer that favouring Fate success assure</span>
          <br/>
          <span>to men whose labours shall my name obscure?</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span class="pagenum" id="Page_30">[Pg 30]</span> <br/>
          <span>“Erst willed the Gods,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-19" id="noteref-19">[19]</a>
            who
            willed away the right<span class="linenum">75</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to Philip’s son, that o’er this Orient part</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">he hold such power, and display such might</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">which bound the world ’neath yoke of angry Mart:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">But shall I tamely suffer Fate’s despight,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">who lends these weaklings pow’er of arm and art,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Macedon’s hero, Roman brave and I</span>
          <br/>
          <span>before the Lusian name be doomed to fly?</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“This must not, shall not be! ere he arrive<span class="linenum">76</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">this froward Captain at his fancied goal,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">such cunning machinations I’ll contrive</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">never shall Orient parts his sight console:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">And now to Earth! where I will keep alive</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the fire of fury in the Moorish soul;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>for him shall Fortune with success indue,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>who on Occasion keepeth fixèd view.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>He spoke infuriate, nay, well-nigh insane,<span class="linenum">77</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and straight he ’lighted on the Negro shore;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">where, mortal gest and human vesture tane,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">he made for Prasum Headland famed of yore:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Better to weave his web of wily bane,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">he changed his nat’ural shape until it wore</span>
          <br/>
          <span>a Moorman’s likeness, known in Mozambíque,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>a crafty greybeard, favoured of the Shaykh.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>And, entering him to rede at hour and time <span class="linenum">78</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_31">[Pg 31]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">most fitting deemèd for designèd wile,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">a tale of pyracy he told and crime,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">wrought by the strangers harbour’d in his isle:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">How all the res’ident nations maritime</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">bruited reports of battle, death, and spoil,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>at ev’ery haven, where the for’eigner past</span>
          <br/>
          <span>who with false pacts of peace his anchors cast.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And, know thou further” (quoth the Moor) “’tis said,<span class="linenum">79</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">anent these Christian knaves sanguinolent,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">that, so to speak, they garred the waves run red</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">scathing with fire and steel where’er they went:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Far-framèd plottings, certès, have been laid</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">against ourselves, for ’tis their whole intent</span>
          <br/>
          <span>our homes to rifle, to destroy our lives,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>enchain our children and enslave our wives.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“I also learnèd how determined be<span class="linenum">80</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">forthwith for wat’ering to’ward the land to steer,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">this Captain, with a doughty company;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">for evil purpose ever ’getteth fear.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Go, too, and take thy men-at-arms with thee,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">waiting him silent in well-ambusht rear;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>so shall his People, landing unawares</span>
          <br/>
          <span>fall ready victims to thy ruse and snares.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And, even should they by this not’able feat <span class="linenum">81</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_32">[Pg 32]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">fail to be scatter’d, shatter’d, wholly slain,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">I have imaginèd a rare conceit</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of marv’ellous cunning which thy heart shall gain:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">A pilot bid be brought of wily wit</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">nor less astute to lay the skilful train,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>who shall the stranger lead where bane and bale,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>loss, death, destruction wait on every sail.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>These words of wisdom hardly had he stay’d,<span class="linenum">82</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">when the Moor-chieftain, old in fraud and wise,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">fell on his bosom and full glad obey’d,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">such counsel finding favour in his eyes:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Then instant faring forth he ready made</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">for the base warfare bellicose supplies;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>so might the Lusians see, when gained the shore,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>the wisht-for waters turned to crimson gore.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>And, eke, he seeketh, such deceit to speed,<span class="linenum">83</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">a Moslem Loadsman who the prows shall guide,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">shrewd, subtle villain, prompt to wicked deed,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whereon for dangerous feat he most relied:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Him he commands the Lusitan to lead,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and with him hug such coasts and stem such tide,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>that e’en escaping present dangers all</span>
          <br/>
          <span>he further wend, and whence none rise shall fall.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Already lit Apollo’s morning ray <span class="linenum">84</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_33">[Pg 33]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the Nabathæan mounts with rosy light,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">when dight was Gama and his stout array</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">by sea for wat’ering on the land t’ alight:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Their boats the soldiers armed for fight and fray</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">as though they scented tricks of Moslem spite:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Here was suspicion easy, for the wise</span>
          <br/>
          <span>bear a presaging heart that never lies.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Further, the messenger who went ashore<span class="linenum">85</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to claim the promise of the needful guide,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">heard tone of battle when replied the Moor,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">though none had deemèd he had thus replied.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Wherefore, and recking ’right how sore their stowre</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">who in perfidious enemy confide,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>he fared forearm’d, forewarn’d, and risking nought,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>in his three launches,—all the boats he brought.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But now the Moormen, stalking o’er the strand<span class="linenum">86</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to guard the wat’ery stores the strangers need;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">this, targe on arm and assegai in hand,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">that, with his bended bow, and venom’d reed,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">wait till the warlike People leap to land:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Far stronger forces are in ambush hid;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and, that the venture may the lighter seem</span>
          <br/>
          <span>a few decoys patrol about the stream.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Along the snow-white sandy marge advance <span class="linenum">87</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_34">[Pg 34]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the bellic Moors who beck their coming foes;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">they shake the shield and poise the per’ilous lance,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">daring the warrior Portughuese to close.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The gen’erous People with impatient glance</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the ban-dogs eye who dare their fangs expose:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>They spring ashore so deftly no man durst</span>
          <br/>
          <span>say who the soldier that touch’ed land the first.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>As in the gory ring some gallant gay,<span class="linenum">88</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">on his fair ladye-love with firm-fixt eyes,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">seeketh the furious bull and bars the way,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">bounds, runs, and whistles; becks and shouts and cries:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The cruel monster sans a thought’s delay,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">low’ering its hornèd front, in fury flies</span>
          <br/>
          <span>with eyne fast closed; and, roaring horrid sound,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>throws, gores, and leaves him lifeless on the ground:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Lo! from the launches sudden flash the lights<span class="linenum">89</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of fierce artill’ery with infuriate blare;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the leaden bullet kills, the thunder frights,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and hissing echoes cleave the shrinking air:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Now break the Moormen’s hearts and haughty sprites,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whose blood cold curdleth with a ghastly fear:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>The skulking coward flies his life to save,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and dies to Death exposed the daring brave.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Withal the Portingalls are not content; <span class="linenum">90</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_35">[Pg 35]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">fierce Vict’ory urging on, they smite and slay:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The wall-less, undefended settlement</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">they shell and burn and make an easy prey.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The Moors their raid and razzia sore repent,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">who lookt for vict’ory won in cheaper way:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Now they blaspheme the battle, cursing wild</span>
          <br/>
          <span>th’ old meddling fool, and her that bare such child.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Still, in his flight, the Moorman draweth bow,<span class="linenum">91</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">but forceless, frighted, flurried by alarms,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">showers of ashlar, sticks, and stones they throw;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">their madding fury ’ministereth arms:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Now from their islet-homesteads flocking row</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">toward the mainland, trembling terr’ified swarms:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>They pass apace and cut the narrow Sound,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>The thin sea-arm, which runs their islet round.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-20" id="noteref-20">[20]</a></span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>These ply the deeply-laden almadie,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-21" id="noteref-21">[21]</a><span class="linenum">92</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">those cut the waves and dil’igent swim the Main;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">some choke ’neath bending surge of surfy sea,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">some drink the brine, out-puffing it again.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The crank canoes, wherein the vermin flee,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">are torn by smaller bombards’ fiery rain.</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Thuswise, in fine, the Portingalls chastise</span>
          <br/>
          <span>their vile, malicious, treach’erous enemies.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Now to the squadron, when the day was won, <span class="linenum">93</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_36">[Pg 36]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">rich with their warlike spoils the Braves retire,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and ship at leisure water all their own,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">none meet offence where none t’ offend desire.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The Moors heart-broken vainly make their moan,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">old hatreds ’flaming with renewèd fire;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and, hopeless to revenge such foul defeat,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>nourish the fairest hopes of fresh deceit.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>To proffer truce repentant gives command<span class="linenum">94</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the Moor who ruleth that iniqu’ous shore;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">nor do the Lusitanians understand</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">that in fair guise of Peace he proffers War:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">For the false Pilot sent to show the land</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">who ev’ry evil will embosom’d bore,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>only to guide them deathwards had been sent;—</span>
          <br/>
          <span>such was the signal of what peace was meant.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The Capitayne who now once more incline’d<span class="linenum">95</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">on wonted way and ’custom’d course to hie,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">fair weather fav’ouring with propitious wind,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and wend where India’s long-wisht regions lie;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">received the Helmsman for his ill design’d</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">(who greeted was with joyous courtesy;)</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and, giv’en his answer to the messenger,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>in the free gale shakes out his sailing gear.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Dismist by such device the gallant Fleet <span class="linenum">96</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_37">[Pg 37]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">divideth Amphitritè’s wavy way;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the Maids of Nereus troop its course to greet,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">faithful companions, debonnair and gay:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The Captain, noways doubting the deceit</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">planned by the Moorman to secure his prey,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>questions him largely, learning all he knows</span>
          <br/>
          <span>of gen’eral Inde and what each seaboard shows.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But the false Moorman, skilled in all the snares<span class="linenum">97</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">which baleful Bacchus taught for such emprize,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">new loss by death or prison-life prepares,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">ere India’s seaboard glad their straining eyes:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The hythes of India dil’igent he declares,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to frequent queries off’ring fit replies:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>For, holding faithful all their pilot said</span>
          <br/>
          <span>the gallant People were of nought afraid.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>And eke he telleth, with that false intent,<span class="linenum">98</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">whereby fell Sinon baulked the Phrygian race</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of a near-lying isle, that aye had lent</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to Christian dwellers safest dwelling-place.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Our Chief, of tidings fain, gave due attent</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">of ear so gladly to these words of grace,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>that with the richest gifts he bade the Guide</span>
          <br/>
          <span>lead him to regions where such men abide.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>E’en so that losel Moorman had designèd, <span class="linenum">99</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_38">[Pg 38]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">as the confiding Christian begged and bade;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">knowing his islet was of old assignèd</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">to the malignant sons of Mafamed:</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Here he foresees deceit with death combinèd,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">for-that in pow’r and force the place outweigh’d</span>
          <br/>
          <span>weaker Mozámbic; and that islet’s name</span>
          <br/>
          <span>is Quiloa bruited by the blast of Fame.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Thither th’ exulting Squadron lief would steer:<span class="linenum">100</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">but the fair god Cythéra loves to greet,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">seeing its certain courses changed to near</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">the coasts where Doom of Death awaits defeat,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">nills that the people, loved with love so dear,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">such dreadful fates on shore so distant meet;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and, raising adverse gales, she drives them wide</span>
          <br/>
          <span>from the foul goal where guides that felon guide.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Now when the caitiff Moor could not but know<span class="linenum">101</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">that in this matter useless was his guile,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">seeking to deal another dev’ilish blow,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and still persistent in his purpose vile,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">he urgeth, since the winds’ and currents’ flow</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">had borne them on parforce full many a mile,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>they near another island, and its race</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Christian and Moor hold common dwelling-place.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Here too with every word the liar lied, <span class="linenum">102</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_39">[Pg 39]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">as by his reg’iment he in fine was bound;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">for none who <span class="smcap">Christ</span> adore could there
            abide,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">only the hounds who worship false Mahound.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">The Captain trustful to his Moorish guide,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">veering the sails was making for the Sound:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>But, as his guardian Goddess leave denieth,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>he shuns the river-bar, and outside lieth.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>So near that Islet lay along the land,<span class="linenum">103</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">nought save a narrow channel stood atween;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and rose a City thronèd on the strand,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">which from the margent of the seas was seen;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">fair-built with lordly buildings tall and grand,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">as from its offing showèd all its sheen:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Here ruled a monarch for long years high famèd;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Islet and City are Mombasah namèd.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-22" id="noteref-22">[22]</a></span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>And when the Captain made that happy shore,<span class="linenum">104</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">with strangest joyaunce, in the hope to view</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">baptizèd peoples, and to greet once more</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">dear Christian men, as sware his guide untrue;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">lo! boats come bearing, the blue waters o’er</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">their King’s good greeting who the stranger knew:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>For long had Bacchus of th’ event advisèd,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>in other Moorman’s shape and form disguisèd.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Friendly the message which the foemen brought, <span class="linenum">105</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_40">[Pg
              40]</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">beneath whose surface covered venom lay;</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">for deadly hostile was their ev’ry thought</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">and soon the hidden fraud uncover’d they.</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Oh dreadful dangers with destruction fraught!</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Oh line of life-tide, never certain way!</span>
          <br/>
          <span>where’er his dearest hope poor mortal hoardeth,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>such scant security life e’er affordeth!</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>By sea such tempests, such sore injury,<span class="linenum">106</span></span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">with Death so often showing near and sure!</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">By land such warfare, such foul treachery,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">so much of curst necessities t’ endure!</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">Ah! where shall weary man take sanctuary,</span>
          <br/>
          <span class="i2">where live his little span of life secure?</span>
          <br/>
          <span>and ’scape of Heav’n serene th’ indignant storms</span>
          <br/>
          <span>that launch their thunders at us earthen worms?</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-i-endnotes">

      <h4>Canto I. Endnotes.</h4>

      <ol>

        <li id="note-1"><p>Ceylon. <a href="#noteref-1" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-2"><p>The “Tagides” are the Poet’s Muses. <a href="#noteref-2" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-3"><p>Alluding to Eclogues, Pastorals, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="#noteref-3" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-4"><p>Invocation to Dom Sebastiam. <a href="#noteref-4" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-5"><p>The Arms of Portugal (Canto III. 53, 54). <a href="#noteref-5" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-6"><p>The Ganges (not the Jordan). <a href="#noteref-6" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-7"><p>Ariosto, i. 2, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="#noteref-7" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-8"><p>For the “Great Constable,” Egas and Fuas, see Cantos IV. 23, and VIII. 13, 17. <a href="#noteref-8" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-9"><p><abbr title="Dom">D.</abbr> Joam III. and the Emperor Charles Quint. <a href="#noteref-9" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-10"><p>End of exordium: narrative begins. <a href="#noteref-10" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-11"><p>Sertorius. <a href="#noteref-11" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-12"><p>Madagascar. <a href="#noteref-12" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-13"><p>Here Cabo-das-Correntes. <a href="#noteref-13" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-14"><p>African daggers and short swords. <a href="#noteref-14" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-15"><p>Mohammed Rasúl Allah. <a href="#noteref-15" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-16"><p>Pronounced Kílwá. <a href="#noteref-16" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-17"><p>Palæologus, <span class="allsmcap"><abbr title="Anno Domini">A.D.</abbr></span> 1453. <a href="#noteref-17" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-18"><p>Arabic. <a href="#noteref-18" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-19"><p>The Parcæ. <a href="#noteref-19" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-20"><p>Camoens had studied the ground. <a href="#noteref-20" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-21"><p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> for canoe. <a href="#noteref-21" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

        <li id="note-22"><p>A perfect sketch. <a href="#noteref-22" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>
      </ol>
    </section>
  </section>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

  <section id="canto-ii">
    <h3>Canto II.</h3>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-ii-argument">

      <h4>Argument<br/>
        of the Second Canto.</h4>

      <p class="continued">Instigated by the Demon, the King of Mombasah aimeth at destroying
        the Navigators: He plotteth treason against them under the fiction
        of friendship: Venus appeareth to Jupiter, and intercedeth for the
        Portugueze: He promiseth her to favour them and prophetically relateth
        some feats which they shall perform in the East: Mercury discloseth
        himself to the Gama in a dream, and warneth him to shun the dangers of
        Mombasah: They weigh anchor and reach Melinde, whose King receiveth the
        Captain with favour and hospitality.</p>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-ii-another-argument">

      <h4>Another Argument.</h4>

      <blockquote class="italics poetry" lang="pt"><div>
        <p>
          <span>Dar El Rei de Mombaça o fim prepara</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Ao Gama illustre, com mortal engano:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Desce Venus ao mar, a frota empara,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>E a fallar sobe ao Padre soberano:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Jove os casos futuros lhe declara:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Apparece Mercurio ao Lusitano:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Chega a frota a Melinde, e o Rei potente</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Em seu porto a recebe alegremente.</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>

      <table class="table-poetry">
        <tbody>
          <tr>
            <td>Mombasah’s King untimely end hath laid</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(1–17)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>For famous Gama by his fell deceit:</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Descending seawards, Venus saves th’ Armade,</td>
            <td>(18–32)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>and fares on high her sovran Sire to greet,</td>
            <td>(33–43)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>She learns our future lot by Jove’s good aid:</td>
            <td>(44–55)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>appeareth Mercury to Lusus’ fleet,</td>
            <td>(56–71)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>It makes Melindé, where a potent Chief</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(72–End)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>within his harbour lendeth glad relief.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-ii-body">

      <h4>Canto II.</h4>

      <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

      <p>
        <span>’Twas now the period when the Planet bright,<span class="linenum">1</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose race distinguisheth the hours of day,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">did at his longed-for, tardy goal alight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">veiling from human eyne his heav’enly ray;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and of his Ocean-home, deep hid from sight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the God of Night-tide oped the portal-way;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when the false crafty folk came flocking round</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the ships, whose anchors scarce had bit the ground.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>’Mid them a villain, who had undertane<span class="linenum">2</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the task of deadly damage, spake aloud:—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">“O val’orous Captain, who hast cut the reign</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Neptune, and his salty plain hast plow’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the King who governeth this island, fain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to greet thy coming, is so pleased and proud,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>he wisheth nothing save to be thy host,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to see thee, and supply what need ye most.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“And, as he burneth, with extreme desire,<span class="linenum">3</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_46">[Pg. 46]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so famed a pers’onage to behold and greet,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he prays suspicion may no fear inspire;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but cross the bar-line, thou and all thy Fleet;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And, sith by voyage long men greatly tire,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">thy gallant crew by travel-toil is beat,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>he bids thee welcome to refit on land</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as, cèrtes, Nature must such rest command.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“And if thou wendest seeking merchandise<span class="linenum">4</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">got in the golden womb of the Levant,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Cinnamon, cloves, and biting spiceries,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">health-dealing drug, or rare and excellent plant;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">or, if thou lust for sparkling stones of price,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Ruby fine, the rigid Diamant,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>hence shall thou bear such full, abundant store,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that e’en thy Fancy shall affect no more.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Unto the Herald straight our Chief replieth,<span class="linenum">5</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">grateful acknowledging the Royal hest;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and saith, that seeing Sol now seawards hieth</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he may not enter as becomes a guest:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But, when returning light shall show where lieth</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the way sans danger, with a fearless breast,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Royal orders he will list fulfil,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a Lord so gracious hath claim higher still.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>He questions further, an the land contain<span class="linenum">6</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_47">[Pg. 47]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">christenèd Peoples, as the Pilot sware:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The cunning Herald who ne’er speaks in vain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">voucheth that Christian men dwell mostly there.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thus doth he banish from our Captain’s brain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the cautious phantasies of doubt and fear:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Wherefore the Gama straightways ’gan to place</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Faith in that faithless unbeliever-race.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-23" id="noteref-23">[23]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>And, as condemnèd felons he had brought,<span class="linenum">7</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">convíct of mortal crime and shameful deed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who might in sim’ilar cases danger-fraught</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">be ventured where the common weal had need;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a twain of wily, well-tried wits he sought,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">bade them the Moorman’s craft and trick’eries heed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>go spy the City’s power, and seek to see</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whether desirèd Christians there may be.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Fair gifts he gave them for the Royal hand,<span class="linenum">8</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to quit the goodly will the greeting show’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by him held sure and firm and clear and bland,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whereas ’twas cleanly of a cont’rary mode.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now all the rout perfidious and nefand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">quitting the Squadron o’er the waters row’d:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>With gladsome, joyous gestures, all deceit,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>The pair of shipmates on the shore they greet.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>And when in presence of the King convey’d,<span class="linenum">9</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_48">[Pg. 48]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the gifts they gave, and message did present,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">far less they witness’d, as ’bout town they stray’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">than what they wanted on their work intent;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the shrewd sagacious Moors pretences made</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to veil from sight what they to see were sent;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for where reigns Malice there we ever find</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the fear of Malice in a neighbour’s mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>But He,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-24" id="noteref-24">[24]</a> for ever fair, for
          ever young<span class="linenum">10</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in form and feature, born of mothers twain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by wondrous birth-rite; and whose wilful tongue</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">would work the Navigators’ ban and bane—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">dwelt in a house the City-folk among,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of form and vestment human; who did feign</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to be a Christian priest, and here had raisèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a sumptuous altar where he prayed and praisèd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>There had he limnèd, figuring aright<span class="linenum">11</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Holy Ghost’s high heavenly portraiture;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">hover’d a Dove, in snowy plume bedight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">o’er the sole Phœnix, Mary, Virgin pure:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The Saintly Company was shown to sight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Dozen, in that sore discomfiture,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as when, taught only by the Tongues that burnt</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with lambent fire, man’s varied tongues they learnt.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Thither conducted either Comrade went,<span class="linenum">12</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_49">[Pg. 49]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where hateful Bacchus stood in lies array’d;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and rose their spirits, while their knees were bent</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">before the God who sways the worlds He made.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The perfumed incense by Panchaia sent,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">fuming its richest scent, o’ th’ altar laid</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Thyóne’s Son; and now they view, forsooth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the god of Lies adore the God of Truth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Here was receiv’ed, for kindly rest at night,<span class="linenum">13</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with ev’ery mode of good and trusty greeting,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the twain of Christians, who misween’d the rite,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">th’ unholy show of holy counterfeiting.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But soon as Sol returning rained his light</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on sombre Earth, and in one instant fleeting</span>
        <br/>
        <span>forth from the ruddy-dyed horizon came</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Spouse Tithonian with her front aflame:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Return the Moormen bearing from the land<span class="linenum">14</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Royal licence, with the Christian pair,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that disembarkèd by our Chief’s command,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for whom the King feign’ed honest friendship fair:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The Portingall, assured no plot was plan’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and seeing scanty fear of scathe or snare</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when Christian peoples in the place abode,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to stem the salty river straightway stood.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Advisèd him the scouts dispatcht ashore<span class="linenum">15</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_50">[Pg. 50]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that holy clerk and altars met their sight;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and how receivèd them the friendly Moor</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while Night’s cloud-shadowèd mantle cloaked the light;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Nay, that both Lord and Liege no feeling bore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">save what in kindness took a dear delight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for, certès, nothing told of doubt or fear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where proofs of friendship showèd sure and clear.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Whereon the noble Gama hied to greet<span class="linenum">16</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">gladly the Moors that up the bulwarks plied;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for lightly trusteth sprite without deceit;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and gallant souls in goodly show confide.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The crafty people on the Flagship meet,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">mooring their light canoes along her side:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Merrily trooped they all, because they wot</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the wisht-for prizes have become their lot.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>The cautious war-men gather on the land<span class="linenum">17</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">arms and ’munitions; that whene’er th’ Armade</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ride at her anchors near the riv’erine strand</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the work of boarding may be readier made:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">With deepest treachery the traitors plan’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for those of Lusus such an ambuscade,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that reckless of the coming doom they pay</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the blood-debt dating from Mozámbic Bay.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Weighed are the biting anchors, rising slow,<span class="linenum">18</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_51">[Pg. 51]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while ’customed capstan-songs and shouts resound;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">only the foresails to the gale they throw</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as for the buoyèd bar the Ships are bound:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But Erycína fair, from ev’ry foe</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">aye glad to guard and guide her Race renown’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>seen the black ambush big with deadly bane,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>flies from the welkin shaft-swift to the Main.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>She musters Nereus’ maidens fair and blonde,<span class="linenum">19</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with all the meiny of the sea-blue race;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Water-princes her commandment own’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for the salt Ocean was her natal place:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Then, told the reason why she sought the lond,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with her whole bevy forth she set apace,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to stay the Squadron ere it reach the bourne</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whence ne’er a Traveller may to life return.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>On, on they hurry, scatt’ring high the spray,<span class="linenum">20</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and lash with silvern trains the spumy White:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Doto’s soft bosom breasts the briny way</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with hotter pressure than her wonted plight.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Springs Nisé, while Neríne seeks the fray</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">clearing the crystal wavelets nimble light:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>The bending billows open wide a path,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>fearing to rouse the hurrying Nereids’ wrath.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Borne on a Triton’s shoulders rides in state<span class="linenum">21</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_52">[Pg. 52]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with fiery gesture, Dionæa fair;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor feels the bearer that delicious weight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">superb his cargo of such charms to bear:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now draw they nearer where stiff winds dilate</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the bellicose Armada’s sailing gear:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>They part, and sudden with their troops surround</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the lighter vessels in the vayward bound.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Girt by her nymphs the Goddess lays her breast<span class="linenum">22</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">against the Flagship’s prow, and others close</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the harbour-entrance; such their sudden gest</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the breeze through bellied canvas vainly blows:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">With tender bosom to tough timber prest</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">she drives the sturdy ship that sternward goes:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Her circling Nereids raise and urge afar</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the threatened victim from the hostile bar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>E’en as to nesty homes the prov’ident Ants,<span class="linenum">23</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">their heavy portion’d burthens haling slow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">drill their small legions, hostile combatants,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’gainst hostile Winter’s war of frost and snow:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">There are their travails given to their wants,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">there puny bodies mighty spirits show:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Not otherwise the Nymphs from fatal end</span>
        <br/>
        <span>labour the Portughuezes to defend.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Their force prevails; astern the Flagship falleth,<span class="linenum">24</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_53">[Pg. 53]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’spite all aboard her raising fearful shout;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">boiling with rage the Crew each yardarm hauleth</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to port and starboard putting helm about:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Apoop the cunning Master vainly bawleth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">seeing that right toforn upon his route,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>uprears a sea-girt rock its awful head,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and present shipwreck fills his soul with dread.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>But as loud call and clamour ’gan uprise<span class="linenum">25</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from the rude sailor toiling hard and keen;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Moors are frighted by th’ unusèd cries,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as though they sighted Battle’s horrid scene.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">None know the reason of such hot surprise;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">none know in sim’ilar press whereon to lean;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>they hold their treach’erous felon tricks are known,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and present tortures must their crime atone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Lo! with a panick fear themselves they flung<span class="linenum">26</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in the swift-sailing barklets which they brought:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">These high uplifted on the billows hung,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">those deep in water diving safety sought:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Sudden from starboard and from port they sprung,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by dread of visionary sights distraught;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for all would rather tempt the cruel tide,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for none in mercies of their foes confide.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Of such a fashion in the sylvan Mere<span class="linenum">27</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_54">[Pg. 54]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Frogs, a brood of Lycian blood whilòme,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when fall of coming foot perchance they hear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while all incautious left their wat’ery home,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wake marish-echoes hopping here and there</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to ’scape the perils threat’ening death and doom;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and, all ensconcèd in the well-known deep</span>
        <br/>
        <span>nought but their small black heads ’bove water peep:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>So fly the Moors; the Loadsman who alone<span class="linenum">28</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Ships in deadly imm’inent risk had led,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">deeming his hateful plans to all beknown,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">plunged in the bitter depths and swimming fled.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But as her course had missed the steadfast stone,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where every hope of darling life were dead,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>eftsoons our Amm’irall doth her anchor throw,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and, near her, furling sail, the rest come to.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Observant Gama, seen this sudden sight<span class="linenum">29</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Moorish strangeness, and surprised to view</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his Pilot flying with accusing flight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">divines the plottings of that bestial crew:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And when ne hindrance showèd, ne the might</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of tides that onwards bore, or winds that blew,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>yet that his Flagship forged ahead no more,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Marvel hailing thus he ’gan implore:—</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Oh Chance, strange, passing strange, that gave no sign!<span class="linenum">30</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_55">[Pg. 55]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Oh wondrous Godsend shown so clear, so plain!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Oh fellest treason baffled inopine!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Oh hostile Paynims, false, perfidious strain!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Who of such desp’erate devilish design</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by mortal wisdom could escape the bane,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>unless there throned in Heav’en the Sovran Guard</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to weak humanity strong aid award?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Right well hath provèd Providence on high,<span class="linenum">31</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the scanty safety by these Ports purvey’d:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Right well appearance showeth every eye,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">how all our confidence hath been betray’d:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But since Man’s wit and wisdom vainly try</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to sound these feints and foils so deeply laid,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>O Thou, Almighty Guard! to guard him deign</span>
        <br/>
        <span>who sans Thine aid himself would guard in vain!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“And if Thy holy ruth so condescend<span class="linenum">32</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to save this People peregrine and poor,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who on Thy grace and goodness sole depend,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to force salvation from the false fell Moor;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">vouchsafe, O Lord, our weary course shall end</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">at some fair Harbour, shelter’d and secure;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>or show the distant shores we pine to see,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>since all this sailing is for serving Thee.”</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>The piteous prayer smote the loving ears<span class="linenum">33</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_56">[Pg. 56]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Dionæa fair; her heart was painèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">she left her Nymphs, all bathed in yearning tears,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who by her sudden flight perplext remainèd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now she had thrid the lum’inous planet-spheres,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">now the third Heaven’s gateway she had gainèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>on, onward still to the sixth sphere, the throne</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where high All-Father sits and reigns alone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>And, as her way affronting, forth she hied,<span class="linenum">34</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">her ev’ry gesture such a grace expirèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Stars, Skies and Æther’s circumambient tide,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and all that saw her with love-fire were firèd.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Those eyne wherein Dan Cupid aye doth nide,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">such vital spirits in all life inspirèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the frigid Poles with torrid ardours burnèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and spheres of Arctic frost to flame were turnèd.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-25" id="noteref-25">[25]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>And with more love to move her Sovereign<span class="linenum">35</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Sire, who aye lov’d her with a constant will,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">herself she shows as to the Trojan swain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">she showed of old on Ida’s bosky hill.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">If her the Hunter who the form of man</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lost, seeing Dian in the glassy rill,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>had seen, he ne’er had died by rav’ening hound,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>erst slain by a sorer and a surer wound.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Wander’d the crispy threads of wavy gold<span class="linenum">36</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_57">[Pg. 57]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">adown a bosom shaming virgin snow:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Her milk-hued breasts with ev’ry movement roll’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where Love lay sporting but did nowhere show:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Flames with far-flashing fire the Zone’s white fold</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wherewith the Boy gar’d ev’ry heart to glow:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>while round those columns’ polisht curves were climbing</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Desires, like ivy parent-trunk entwining.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>A filmy Cendal<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-26" id="noteref-26">[26]</a> winds around
          her waist,<span class="linenum">37</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which del’icate sense conceals by modest veiling;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and yet not all conceal’d, nor all confest,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the veil, red-blushing lilies oft revealing:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">With warmer fondness still to ’flame his breast</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">she woos his sight with secret charms assailing:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Now all Olympus shakes with jealous jars,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>rage burneth Vulcan, Love inflameth Mars.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>The while her angel-semblance showeth blended<span class="linenum">38</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with smiles a sadness in the sweetest way;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">like some fair Ladye by rude swain offended</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">incautious rough while playing am’orous play;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who laughs and laughing pouts with wrath pretended</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">passing withouten pause from grave to gay;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>thus she, the Goddess who no rival heedeth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>softer than sad before her Father pleadeth.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Aye had I deemèd, mighty Father mine,<span class="linenum">39</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_58">[Pg. 58]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in whatsoe’er my loving breast preferrèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to find thee kind and affable and benign,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">e’en though of hostile heart the hate were stirrèd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But as I see thine ire to me incline,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ire undeserv’ed,—to thee I ne’er have errèd,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>let Bacchus triumph with his wicked will;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>while in his weal I sit and wail mine ill.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“This Folk, these Sons of me, for whom I pour<span class="linenum">40</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the tear that trickleth bootless ’fore thy sight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose woe, since wish’d them well, I work the more</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when my good wishes but thy wrath excite:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">For them I weep, for them thine aid implore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and thus, in fine, with adverse fate I fight:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>But now, because my love ill-fortune bears,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>I will to will them ill and weal be theirs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Yet thus to perish by that wild-beast race,<span class="linenum">41</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for I have been”<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-27" id="noteref-27">[27]</a>
          * * * Whereon, all lovely flows</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the burning tear-drop beading down her face,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as pearled with rory dew fresh shines the Rose:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Silent awhile, as though her plea for grace</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the portals of her teeth list not disclose</span>
        <br/>
        <span>she had pursued; but ere a word she said</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the potent Thund’erer further plaint forbade:</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>And, moved to pity by such gentle powers,<span class="linenum">42</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_59">[Pg. 59]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">pow’ers made to move the heart of Tyger dure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with beaming smile, as when the sky that lowers</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">waxeth serene, and clears the lift obscure;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he dries his Daughter’s welling tears, and showers</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">warm kisses on her cheeks and neck snow-pure;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>in mode that had the place been lere and lone</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a pair of Cupids had Olympus known.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>And, face approaching to the face he prizèd,<span class="linenum">43</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whereat the sobbing tears the faster flow;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">e’en as some yeanling by the nurse chastisèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">weepeth caresst with louder feint of woe:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">To soothe her troubled bosom he devisèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the future fortunes of her sons to show,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>unripping thus from Fate’s impregnate womb</span>
        <br/>
        <span>He opes the mysteries of the things to come:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Thou fairest Daughter mine! throw far thy fear<span class="linenum">44</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lest to thy Lusians happen harm indign;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor deem my spirit holdeth aught so dear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as the sad waters of these sov’reign eyne:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thou shalt behold, my Daughter, hear me swear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Greek and Roman dimm’d of all his shine,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by Gestes illustrious this thy Hero-race</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Shall dare and do in Eastern dwelling-place.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“If glib Ulysses e’er to flee was fated<span class="linenum">45</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_60">[Pg. 60]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a life-long slav’ery on Ogygia-shore;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and if Antenor’s fortune penetrated</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Illyric bays, Timavus’ fount t’ explore;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">e’en if thy pious Æneas navigated</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where seas round Scylla and Charybdis roar;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>thy nobler scions higher grade shall win,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>shall add new worlds to worlds of older men.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Valvartes and cities and the tow’ering wall<span class="linenum">46</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">built by their valour, Daughter, thou shalt see:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Shalt see the Turk, deem’ed bravest brave of all,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from their dread prowess forcèd aye to flee:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Shalt see of Inde the free-born monarchs fall</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and own their mightier King’s supremacy:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>And when, in fine, they wield the full command</span>
        <br/>
        <span>shall dawn a Higher Law<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-28" id="noteref-28">[28]</a> for
          every land.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Him shalt thou see, who now in hurrièd flight<span class="linenum">47</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">fares distant Indus through such fears to find,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">make vasty Neptune tremble with affright,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and crisp his wavy waste sans breath of wind.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Oh Chance ne’er seen! Oh wonder-teeming Sight!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">this Quake of Water with plat calm combin’d!</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Oh valiant race, with loftiest thought inbred,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whom Earth’s four El’ements must regard with dread!<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-29" id="noteref-29">[29]</a></span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“This Land, that water hath to them denied,<span class="linenum">48</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_61">[Pg. 61]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">shalt see affording surest Hythe, where spent</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by their long voyaging, shall rest and ride</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Argosies bound from utmost Occident.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">In fine, this seaboard all, that futile tried</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">death-snare to weave, shall pay obedient</span>
        <br/>
        <span>toll, tythe, and tribute, knowing vain it were</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to beard the Lusian Lyon in his lair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Shalt see King Erythras’ far-famèd Main<span class="linenum">49</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">permute his nat’ural red to Fear’s pale dye:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">eke shalt thou see the haughty Hormuz-reign</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">twice taken, prostrate in their presence lie:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">There shalt thou see the furious Moorman slain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">pierced by his own deflected archery;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-30" id="noteref-30">[30]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span>till all ken clearly who thy Sons oppose</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by their own deed become their deadliest foes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Shalt see of Diu<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-31" id="noteref-31">[31]</a> th’
          inexpugnable wall,<span class="linenum">50</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">two sieges braving, while thy sons defend;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">there shall their val’orous worth be shown to all</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with feats of arms that every feat transcend:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Envy shalt see in Mars majestical</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Lusian fierceness none shall dare offend:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>There shall they sight the Moor with voice supreme</span>
        <br/>
        <span>before high Heaven false Mahound blaspheme.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Thou shalt see Góa from the Moslem tane,<span class="linenum">51</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_62">[Pg. 62]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and in near future raised to queenly place,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Ladye of Orient land sublimely vain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of triumphs wrested by thy conqu’ering Race.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">There, with superb, high, haughtiest disdain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Gentoo louting low to idols base,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>they bit and bridle, mastering every land</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that ’gainst thy Lusians raiseth head or hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Thou shalt behold the Fortalice hold out<span class="linenum">52</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Cananor with scanty garnison:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Calecut thou shalt see endure sad rout,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that erst so populous and puissant town;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">shalt in Cochin<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-32" id="noteref-32">[32]</a>
          see one approv’d so stout,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who such an arr’ogance of the sword hath shown,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>no harp of mortal sang a similar story,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>digne of e’erlasting name, eternal glory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Ne’er with such Mars-taught art and furious flame,<span class="linenum">53</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">was Leucas seen in civil wars to glow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when to his Actium-fight Augustus came</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and laid th’ injurious Roman captain low;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whom, deft Aurora’s reign and race to tame,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">far-famèd Nyle and Bactrus’ Scythic foe,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>despoilèd, ’spite victorious spoils and rare,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that fair Egyptian not so chaste as fair;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-33" id="noteref-33">[33]</a></span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“As thou shalt see when Ocean boileth o’er<span class="linenum">54</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_63">[Pg. 63]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with fires enkindled by thy Lusians’ bate,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who captive make the Idol-man and Moor,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and triumph high o’er many a subject state:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Till, won rich Aurea-Chersonésus’-shore</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">far as far China they shall navigate,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and each remotest isle of Orient tide</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and every Ocean in their rule shall bide.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Tis thus, O Daughter mine! thy children’s lot<span class="linenum">55</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">higher than human vigour to display,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nowhere shall Brav’ery burn and blaze so hot</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from Ganges’ bank to Gaditanian bay;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor from the Boreal billows to the gut</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where first an injured Lusian brake the way;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-34" id="noteref-34">[34]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span>e’en though their progress o’er the world t’ oppose</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Dead of Ages from their tombs arose.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>This said, he sendeth Maia’s son divine<span class="linenum">56</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to visit lowly earth, and there to seek</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">some harbour’s peaceful shelter, with design</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that all the Fleet shall ride sans risk of wreck:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And, lest in false Mombasah-land indign</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">more of delay the valiant Captain make,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>’tis Jove’s command that be in vision shone</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a restful region free from restless fone.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Now th’ airy space the Cyllenéan span’d,<span class="linenum">57</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_64">[Pg. 64]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">descending earth with feath’ery feet to tread;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his hand was armèd with the fatal Wand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which sheds on weary eyne sweet drowsihed;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wherewith he called the sad-eyed shadowy band</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from Hades, and obedient breezes sped:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>The wingèd basnet on his head he bore;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and thus he sought the Melindanian shore.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Fame is his mate who mote aloud proclaim<span class="linenum">58</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Lusitanian’s weight and rarest worth;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for mortal breast is won by noble name,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that makes the bearer loved of all on earth.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thus winning stranger-hearts the Herald came,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and to the mighty bruit gave timely birth:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Anon Desire Melindé burns to see</span>
        <br/>
        <span>what mode of men the val’orous People be.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Thence to Mombasah takes the God his course,<span class="linenum">59</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where the strange vessels rode in fear afar,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to bid the seamen leave, while none the worse,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">those lands suspected and that treacherous bar:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">For scant availeth human fraud or force</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">against Infernals waging treach’erous war:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Scant ’vaileth heart and art and judgment staid</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when human wisdom lacketh heavenly aid.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Already Night had past her middle way,<span class="linenum">60</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_65">[Pg. 65]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and all the starry host with th’ alien light</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">rained on the breadth of Earth their radiance gay;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and now was Sleep tired man’s supreme delight.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Th’ illustrious Captain weary, wayworn, lay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with careful watching through the cares of night,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a short repose for anxious eyne he snatchèd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>The men on duty at their quarters watchèd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>When in a vision Maia’s son was seen<span class="linenum">61</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and heard to say: “Fly, Lusitanian! fly</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that wicked Monarch’s snares, that only mean</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to draw you forwards where ye surely die:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Fly, for breathes fair the breeze and smiles serene</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Æther, while stormless sleep the seas and sky;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>in other part another King more benign</span>
        <br/>
        <span>sure shelter offereth unto thee and thine!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Here nought thou findest but the barb’rous rite<span class="linenum">62</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the guest-rite dear to cruel Diomed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ill-host that made each miserable wight</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the wonted forage of his stabled steed:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Those altars which Busiris, infame sprite,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">taught with the stranger’s wailing life to bleed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>here certès wait thee an thou longer dwell:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Fly, then, this folk perfidious, fierce, and fell!</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Steer straight, along this outstretch’d sea-board run,<span class="linenum">63</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_66">[Pg. 66]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">another land more leal shalt thou find;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">there near the Belt where th’ ever-blazing sun</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to Day and Night hath equal space assign’d:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-35" id="noteref-35">[35]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">There to thy Squadron honour gladly done,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a King, with many a friendly service kind,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the surest shelter shall for thee provide,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and for your India skilful trusty guide.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Mercury thus; and rousèd from his dreams<span class="linenum">64</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Captain rising in a stark dismay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while pierced the palpable Obscure bright streams</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of sudden light and splendid holy ray:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Then, seen forthwith that him it best beseems</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in land so vile to make the shortest stay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>he bade his Master, urged by spirit new,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to spread the canvas in what breeze there blew.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Hoist sail!” he said, “hoist high in lib’ral air,<span class="linenum">65</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for God commands, and Heav’n affects its friends;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from yon clear seats was sent a messengèr</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">only to speed our steps and shape our ends.”</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Meanwhile the sailors to set sail prepare;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">all work and either watch its anchor tends;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the weighty irons with willing shouts are weighèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and sin’ewy strength, the seaman’s pride, displayèd.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Now at what time their anchors high uprose,<span class="linenum">66</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_67">[Pg. 67]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lurking in Night’s murk shadow rose the Moor,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">stealthy to cut the cables of his foes,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that all might perish on the rocky shore:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But watched with lynx-like glances, clear and close,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Portingalls prepared for ev’ry stowre:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Finding his victims wakeful th’ enemy fled</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by wings of terror, not by paddle, sped.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>But now the narrow sharp-cut Prores renew,<span class="linenum">67</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">cleaving the humid argent plain, their road;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">blandly the north and eastern Trade-wind blew</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with gentle movement, as in joyous mood:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Past perils in their talk review’d the Crew,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for with a fond delay Thought loves to brood</span>
        <br/>
        <span>on dang’rous chances, when to death-in-life</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Life comes so near she scarcely ’scapes the strife.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>One circle ended Phœbus all aglow,<span class="linenum">68</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and on a second entered, when appearèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in the far offing, sailing sure and slow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">two hulls by gently-breathing Zephyrs steerèd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And, as they must be manned by Moorish foe</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our Squadron veering soon her prizes nearèd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>This one that fearèd fearful ills to brave</span>
        <br/>
        <span>ran straight ashore her crew thereon to save.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>No sim’lar cunning from such chances led<span class="linenum">69</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_68">[Pg. 68]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">her consort, captive of the Lusian hand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which, ne by rig’rous Mavors’ rage had bled,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor felt what furies Vulcan doth command.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But weakly, master’d by a craven dread,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the feeble forces which the barquelet man’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span>resistance offer’d none; which haply shown,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>from such resisting greater ills had known.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>And as the Gama felt him much incline’d<span class="linenum">70</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to seek a Guide for India-land long sought,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he thought a Helmsman ’mid the Moors to find,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yet naught to him succeeded as he thought;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">none mote give tidings of the lay of Inde,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">under what tract of heav’n it might be brought:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>But all declare a harbour lies hard by</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Melinde, ready Pilots to supply.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Her King’s benevolence the Moormen praise,<span class="linenum">71</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">conditions lib’ral, breast no guile that knew;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">magnificent, grandiose and gentle ways</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with parts that won respect and honour true.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">All this to heart for fact our Captain lays,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">since to his vision came such view to shew</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the dream-sent Cyllenéan; thus he sped</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whither the vision and the Moorman led.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>’Twas the glad season when the God of Day<span class="linenum">72</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_69">[Pg. 69]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">into Europa’s rav’isher ’gan return;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when warmèd either point his genial ray</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and Flora scatter’d Amalthéa’s horn:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The hasty Sun, that girds the heavenly way,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">brought round the mem’ry of that blessèd morn,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when He, who ruleth all by Will Divine,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>upon Creation stampt His seal and sign:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-36" id="noteref-36">[36]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>At such a time the Squadron neared the part,<span class="linenum">73</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where first Melindé’s goodly shore was seen,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in awnings drest and prankt with gallant art,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to show that none the Holy Day misween:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Flutter the flags, the streaming Estandart</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">gleams from afar with gorgeous purple sheen;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>tom-toms and timbrels mingle martial jar:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Thus past they forwards with the pomp of war.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Men crowd and jostle on Melindé’s strand<span class="linenum">74</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">hasting to sight the stranger’s glad Armade;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a folk more truthful far, humane, and bland</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">than any met on shores their course had made.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now rides the Lusian Fleet anent the land:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Her pond’rous anchors now the depths invade:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Forthwith a captured Moor they send to greet</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the King and mani’fest whence had come the Fleet.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>The King who well that noble lineage knew,<span class="linenum">75</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_70">[Pg. 70]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which to the Portingalls such worth imparts,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">prizeth their harb’ring at his Hythe, as due</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the praise to Braves so prompt in martial arts:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And, with the spirit ever pure and true</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that ’nobleth gen’rous souls and gallant hearts,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>he prays by proxy all forthwith may deign</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to land and use, as best they choose, his reign.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Frank offers these, and made in Honour bright,<span class="linenum">76</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">simple the words, undoubted, unprepar’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wherewith the Monarch greets each noble Knight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who o’er such seas and lands so far hath fared.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And eke he sendeth muttons fleecy white</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with many a cramm’d domesticate poulard,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and tropick fruitage which the markets fill:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Yet his good gifts are giv’n with better will.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>A glad and eager ear our Captain lent<span class="linenum">77</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to him who spake his Sovran’s speech benign;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">straightway of royal gifts return he sent</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">stow’d in his Squadron for such fair design:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Purple Escarlat,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-37" id="noteref-37">[37]</a>
          cloth of crimson tint,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the branchy Coral, highly prized and fine,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which in deep Water soft and tender grown,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>in Air doth harden to a precious stone.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Eke sends he one well known for courtly wit,<span class="linenum">78</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_71">[Pg. 71]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who with the King may pact of peace conclude;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and prayeth pardon that he could not quit</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his ships at once, and leave the Fleet aflood.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">His trusty Truchman<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-38" id="noteref-38">[38]</a> on the land alit,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and, as before the Monarch’s face he stood,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>spake thus in style which only Pallas taught</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when praise and prayer firm persuasion wrought:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“O King sublime! to whom Olympus pure<span class="linenum">79</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of His high justice gave the gift and boon</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to curb and conquer peoples dour and dure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to win their love, nor less their fear to own;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as safe asylum, haven most secure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to ev’ry Oriental nation known,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>thee have we come to seek, in thee to find</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the surest med’icine of the Wanderer’s mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“No Pyrates we, who fare on ports to prey,<span class="linenum">80</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and purse-proud cities that in war be weak;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">thieves, who with fire and steel the peoples slay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">their robber-greed on neighbour-goods to wreak:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">From haughty Europe to the realms of Day</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">we sail, and Earth’s remotest verge we seek</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of Inde, the great, the rich, for thus ordaineth</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the mighty Monarch who our country reigneth.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“What brood so harsh as this was ever bred?<span class="linenum">81</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_72">[Pg. 72]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">what barb’arous custom and what usage ban’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that can not only men from ports forbid</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but grudge the shelter of their desert sand?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">What of ill Will hold they our hearts have hid,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that of a folk so few in fear they stand?</span>
        <br/>
        <span>That traps for us they spread and ready snares</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and work their worst whereby we die unwares?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But Thou, wherein full surely we confide<span class="linenum">82</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to find, O King benign! an honest man,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and hope such certain aid to see supplied,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as gave Alcino’us the lost Ithacan,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to this thy Haven sure we stem the tide</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with the Divine Interpreter in van:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>For as He sendeth us to thee ’tis clear</span>
        <br/>
        <span>thy heart must e’en be rare, humane, sincere.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“And deem not thou, O King! that dreads to land<span class="linenum">83</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our famous Captain thee to serve and see,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for aught he sees of base or underhand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">or aught suspects of false and feign’ed in thee:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But know he acteth by the high command,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a law of all obeyed implicitly,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>his King’s own hest, forbidding him t’explore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and from his Squadron land at port or shore.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“And, since of subjects King may thus require,<span class="linenum">84</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_73">[Pg. 73]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for of the Head should members heed the sway,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">thou, kingly officed, never shalt desire</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the liege his lord’s command to disobey;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but the high ben’efits, and those gifts still higher</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by thee bestow’d, he prom’iseth to repay</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with all that done by him or his can be</span>
        <br/>
        <span>long as the rolling rivers seek the Sea.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Thus he; when all conjoint their voices raisèd<span class="linenum">85</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while each to each his separate thoughts convey’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by the high stomach of the Race amazèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who through such seas and skies their way had made.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Th’ illustrious King for loyalty bepraisèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Portingalls, the while his spirit weigh’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span>how high his value, strong his orders are,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whose Royal word is heard in land so far.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>And, with a smiling mien and pleasèd face,<span class="linenum">86</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he hailed the Herald, proff’ering high esteem:—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">“All black suspicions from your bosoms chase,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor let your souls with frigid terror teem;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">such be your gallant worth, your works of grace,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the World your deeds shall aye most glorious deem;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and whoso holdeth right to do you wrong</span>
        <br/>
        <span>ne truth ne noble thoughts to him belong.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“That all you warmen may not instant land<span class="linenum">87</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_74">[Pg. 74]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">observing ’customèd pre-eminence,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">though sorely grievèd by your King’s command,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yet much we prize so much obedience:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Yet, as your orders our desire withstand;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor we consent to see such excellence</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of heart, such loyalty of soul, belied,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that our good wishes sole be gratified.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But, as to-morrow’s Sun on earth shall shine,<span class="linenum">88</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">all our Flotilla shall make holiday;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to seek your sturdy Fleet is our design</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">we have so longed to see full many a day:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And if your sea-tost vessels bear the sign</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of angry tempests, and their tedious way,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>here they shall find in friendly form and guise</span>
        <br/>
        <span>pilots, munitions, vittaile and supplies.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>He spake; and ’neath the sea-rim sank to rest<span class="linenum">89</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Latona’s son, when home the Herald hied,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with the fair message to the Fleet addrest,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in a light canoe that fast outran the tide.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now joy and gladness fillèd ev’ery breast,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">all had the perfect cure at length descried,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Discov’ery of the Land, long wisht-for sight;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and thus they festival’d with glee the night.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Aboard is foyson of those artful rays,<span class="linenum">90</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_75">[Pg. 75]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose splendours mock the trem’ulous hairy star:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now every bombardier his boast displays,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">till Ocean’s thunder answers earth and air.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The Cyclops’ art is shown in various ways,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in fire-stuffed shells, and burning bombs of war:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Others with voices which invade the skies,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>make brazen notes from blaring trumps arise.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Echoes a loud reply the ready shore,<span class="linenum">91</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with buzzing fireworks forming giddy gyre;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whirl burning wheels that far in Æther soar;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sulphurous dust deep-hid explodes in fire:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Heav’en-high resounds the multitudinous roar;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the soft blue waters don Flame’s red attire;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>nor blazeth land the less: ’Tis thus friends greet</span>
        <br/>
        <span>their friends as foemen who in battle meet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Again the restless Spheres revolving sped,<span class="linenum">92</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to olden drudg’ry dooming man anew:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Again did Memnon’s Mother radiance shed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and from the sluggard’s eyne soft sleep withdrew:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The latest shadows slowly melting fled,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on earthly flow’rets weeping frigid dew;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when the Melindan King took boat that he</span>
        <br/>
        <span>might view the Squad that swam the Blackmoor sea.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Boiling about him, swarming round the Bay,<span class="linenum">93</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_76">[Pg. 76]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">dense crowds glad gather’d and enjoy’d the sight:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Caftans of finest purple glisten gay;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">glance splendid robes with silken tissue dight:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">In lieu of warrior lance, and harsegaye<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-39" id="noteref-39">[39]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and bow whose burnisht cusps mock Luna’s light;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>aloft the revellers bear the palmy bough,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the fittest crown that decks the conqueror’s brow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>A spacious stately barge, o’ercanopied<span class="linenum">94</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with dainty silks, of divers teinture stainèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">beareth Melinde’s King, accompanied</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by lords and captains of the land he reignèd.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Rich clad he cometh with what pomp and pride,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his country customs and his taste ordainèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a precious Turbant winds around his head</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of cotton wrought with gold and silken thread.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Caftan of costly texture Damascene,—<span class="linenum">95</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Tyrian colour honour’d there of eld;—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Torque round his collar, shining golden sheen,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose wealth of work its wealth of ore excel’d:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Glitters and gleams with radiance diamantine</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Dag-targe of costly price by girdle held:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>And show, in fine, upon his sandal-shoon</span>
        <br/>
        <span>velvets with seed-pearl and gold-spangle strewn.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>With silken sunshade, high and round of guise<span class="linenum">96</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_77">[Pg. 77]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">fast to its handle bound, a gilded spear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a Minister the solar ray defies</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lest hurt of baleful beam the high King bear:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">High in the poop his strange glad musick hies,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of asp’erous noise, most horr’ible to the ear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of archèd trumpets writhed in curious round,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>roaring a rough, rude, unconcerted sound.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Nor with less garnishment our Lusitanian<span class="linenum">97</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">swift-sailing galleys from the Squadron bore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to meet and greet the noble Melindanian,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">begirt by goodly company galore.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The Gamma cometh dight in dress Hispanian;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but of French work the doublet was he wore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Satin which Adrian Venice works and stains</span>
        <br/>
        <span>crimson, a colour which such prize obtains.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Buttons of gold his loopèd sleeves confine,<span class="linenum">98</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where solar glancings dazzle gazing eyes:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hosen of soldier fashion purfled shine</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with the rich metal Fortune oft denies:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Points of the same the slashes deftly join,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">gored in his doublet, with right del’icate ties:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Gold-hilted sword in mode of Italy:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Plume in his bonnet worn a little wry.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>I’ the suite and escort of the Captain show’d<span class="linenum">99</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_78">[Pg. 78]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of the dye murex,—Tyre’s surpassing tint,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the various shades that joy’d men’s eyne, and mode</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of dress devis’d with fashion different:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Such was th’ enamel, and as bright it glow’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with cunning colours in quaint mixture blent,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as though her rutilant bow had rear’d in air</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Maid of Thaumas, fairest of the fair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Sonorous trumpets manly breasts incite<span class="linenum">100</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">gladding the heart with martial musick gay:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Churnèd the Moorish keels blue waters white</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and awnings sprent with dews of pearly spray:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The horrid-sounding bombards thunder fright</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while smoky hangings veil the splendid day;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>roar the hot volleys hurtling sounds so loud,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>fain close with hands their ears the Moorish crowd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>And now the King our Captain’s galley sought,<span class="linenum">101</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who strainèd in his arms the welcome guest:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">He with the courtesy which Reason taught,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his host (who was of Royal rank) addrest.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Noted th’ admiring Moor, with marvel fraught,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his visitor’s ev’ery mode, and look, and gest,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as one regarding with a huge esteem</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Folk who so far in quest of India came.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>And to him proffers in his phrase high-flown<span class="linenum">102</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_79">[Pg. 79]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whatever goods his realm and haven boast;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the while commanding him to hold his own</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">what store might haply serve his turn the most:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Eke he assures him Fame had made well-known</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Lusian name ere Lusians reached his coast:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for long ’twas rumour’d that in realms afar</span>
        <br/>
        <span>it had with peoples of his law waged war.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>How Africk cont’inent’s farthest shores resound,<span class="linenum">103</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he told him, with great deeds the warmen did;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose long campaigns the Conquerors had crown’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lords of the lands where dwelt the Hesperid.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-40" id="noteref-40">[40]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">With long harangue he taught the crowd around</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the least deserts the Lusians meritèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and yet the most that Fame was fain to teach;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when thus Da Gama to the King made speech:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“O thou! who sole hast seen with pit’iful eye,<span class="linenum">104</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">benignant King! our Lusitanian race,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which in such mis’ery dire hath dared defy</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Fate, and the furies of mad seas to face;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">may yon Divine eternity on high,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that ruleth man, revolving skyey space,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>since gifts so goodly givest thou, I pray</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Heav’ens repay thee what we never may.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Of all Apollo bronzèd hath thou sole,<span class="linenum">105</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_80">[Pg. 80]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">peaceful didst greet us from th’ abysmal sea:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">In thee from Æolus’ winds that moan and howl,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">we find good, truthful, glad security.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Long as its Stars leads forth the vasty Pole,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">long as the Sun shall light the days to be,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where’er I haply live, with fame and glory</span>
        <br/>
        <span>shall live thy praises in my People’s story.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>He spake, and straight the barges ’gin to row<span class="linenum">106</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whither the Moorman would review the Fleet;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">rounding the vessels, one by one, they go</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that ev’ery not’able thing his glance may meet:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But Vulcan skywards voll’eying horr’ible lowe</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with dire artill’ery hastes the guest to greet,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>while trumpets loud canorous accents blend;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with shawms the Moorish hosts their answer send.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>When due attention to the sights had lent<span class="linenum">107</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the gen’erous Moslem, fill’ed with thrilling wonder,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and hearing, eke, th’ unwonted instrument</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that told its dreadful might in fiery thunder;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he bade the light Batèl wherein he went</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">at anchor quiet ride the Flagship under,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that with the doughty Gama he might hold</span>
        <br/>
        <span>converse of matters erst by Rumour told.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>The Moor in varied di’alogue took delight,<span class="linenum">108</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_81">[Pg. 81]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and now he prayed the vis’itor would expound</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">each war renowned and famous feat of fight</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">fought with the races that adore Mahound:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now of the peoples he would gain a sight</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that hold our ultimate Hispanian ground:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Then of the nations who with us confine;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>then of the mighty voyage o’er the brine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But first, O valiant Captain! first relate,”<span class="linenum">109</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">quoth he, “with all the diligence thou can,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">what lands and climes compose your natal state,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and where your home, recount with regular plan;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor less your ancient lineage long and great</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and how your Kingdom’s lofty rule began,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with all your early deeds of derring-do;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>e’en now, tho’ know’ng them not, their worth we know.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“And, prithee, further say how o’er the Main<span class="linenum">110</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">long on this voyage through fierce seas you stray’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">seeing the barb’arous ways of alien strain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which our rude Africk-land to you display’d:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Begin! for now the team with golden rein</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">draws near, and drags the new Sun’s car, inlaid</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with marquetry, from cold Aurora’s skies:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Sleep wind and water, smooth the wavelet lies.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“And as th’ Occasion such a fitness showeth,<span class="linenum">111</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_82">[Pg. 82]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so is our wish your wondrous tale to hear;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who dwells among us but by rumour knoweth</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Lusitanian’s labour singular?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Deem not so far from us removèd gloweth</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">resplendent Sol, that need thy judgment fear</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to find Melinde nurse so rude a breed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which can ne prize ne praise a noble deed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Vainly the haughty olden Giants vied<span class="linenum">112</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by war to win Olympus clear and pure:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Pirith and Theseus mad with ign’orance tried</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Pluto’s realm to burst the dread Obscure;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">If in the world such works hath workèd pride,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">not less ’tis labour excellent and dure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>bold as it was to brave both Heav’en and Hell,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for man o’er raging Nereus to prevail.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“With fire consumèd Dian’s sacred fane,—<span class="linenum">113</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that master-piece of subtle Ctesiphon,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Heróstratus, who by such deed would gain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of world-wide Fame the high immortal boon;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">If greed of foolish praise and glory vain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to actions so perverse may urge men on,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>more reason ’tis to crown with endless fame</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Deeds that deserve, like Gods, a deathless name.”</span>
      </p>
      </div></blockquote>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-ii-endnotes">

      <h4>Canto II. Endnotes.</h4>

      <ol start="23">

      <li id="note-23"><p>Moslems. <a href="#noteref-23" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-24"><p>The “puer æternus,” “Deus bi-mater.” <a href="#noteref-24" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-25"><p>The five zones of Parmenides. <a href="#noteref-25" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-26"><p>Low Lat. Cendalum = thin silk. <a href="#noteref-26" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-27"><p><i>Subaudi</i>, “so hapless.” <a href="#noteref-27" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-28"><p>Christianity. <a href="#noteref-28" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-29"><p>Alluding to Da Gama’s “Sea-quake.” <a href="#noteref-29" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-30"><p>Historical (?) <a href="#noteref-30" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-31"><p>Islet off the Cutch coast, pronounced Dyú. <a href="#noteref-31" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-32"><p>Duarte Pacheco Pereira. <a href="#noteref-32" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-33"><p>Antony and Cleopatra. <a href="#noteref-33" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-34"><p>Magalhaens (Magellan), Canto X., 138. <a href="#noteref-34" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-35"><p>Melinde nearer the Line (<abbr title="South">S.</abbr> lat. 3° 9’). <a href="#noteref-35" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-36"><p>Sol entering Taurus, Easter Sunday, April 5, 1498. <a href="#noteref-36" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-37"><p><i>Escarlata</i>, a woollen cloth. <a href="#noteref-37" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-38"><p>The “dragoman,” Fernam Martins. <a href="#noteref-38" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-39"><p>Our “assegai.” <a href="#noteref-39" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-40"><p>Tangier. <a href="#noteref-40" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>
      </ol>
    </section>
  </section>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

  <section id="canto-iii">
    <h3>Canto III.</h3>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-iii-argument">

      <h4>Argument<br/>
        of the Third Canto.</h4>

      <p>The talk of Vasco da Gama with the King of Melinde, wherein he
        describeth Europe, and recounteth the origin of the kingdom of
        Portugal, its kings (including the King Dom Fernando) and its principal
        achievements: The notable feat of Egás Moníz: The Queen of Castile,
        Dona Maria, visiteth Portugal to crave aid for the Battle of the
        Salado: The loves and luckless fate of Dona Ignéz de Castro: Some
        events which befel the King Dom Fernando.</p>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-iii-another-argument">

      <h4>Another Argument.</h4>

      <blockquote class="italics poetry" lang="pt"><div>
        <p>
          <span>A populosa Europa se descreve;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>De Egas Moniz o feito sublimado,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Lusitania, que Reis, que guerras teve;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Christo a Afonso se expoem crucificado:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>De Dona Ignez de Castro a pura neve</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Em purpura converte o povo irado:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Mostra-se o vil descuido de Fernando,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>E o grão poder de hum gesto suave, e brando.</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>

      <table class="table-poetry">
        <tbody>
          <tr>
            <td>Populous Europe passeth in review;</td>
            <td>(6–23)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Egás Moníz is praised for famous feat;</td>
            <td>(35–41)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>What Kings and wars our Lusitania knew;</td>
            <td>(24–34)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Afonso sees the <span class="smcap">Christ</span> on Cross elate;</td>
            <td>(42–46)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Agnes de Castro’s breast of snowy hue</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(118–135)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>With innocent blood empurpleth popular hate:</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Fernando’s vile neglect is shown to shame,</td>
            <td rowspan="2">(138–143)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td class="border-left">And the high pow’ers that youth and beauty claim.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-iii-body">
      <h4>Canto III.</h4>

      <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

      <p>
        <span>Now, my Calliope! to teach incline<span class="linenum">1</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">what speech great Gama for the King did frame:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Inspire immortal song, grant voice divine</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">unto this mortal who so loves thy name.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thus may the God whose gift was Medicine,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to whom thou barest Orpheus, lovely Dame!</span>
        <br/>
        <span>never for Daphne, Clytia, Leucothöe</span>
        <br/>
        <span>due love deny thee or inconstant grow he.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Satisfy, Nymph! desires that in me teem,<span class="linenum">2</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to sing the merits of thy Lusians brave;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so worlds shall see and say that Tagus-stream</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">rolls Aganippe’s liquor. Leave, I crave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">leave flow’ry Pindus-head; e’en now I deem</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Apollo bathes me in that sovran wave;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>else must I hold it, that thy gentle sprite,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>fears thy dear Orpheus fade through me from sight.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>All stood with open ears in long array<span class="linenum">3</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_88">[Pg. 88]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to hear what mighty Gama mote unfold;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when, past in thoughtful mood a brief delay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">began he thus with brow high-raised and bold:—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">“Thou biddest me, O King! to say my say</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">anent our grand genealogy of old:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Thou bidd’st me not relate an alien story;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>thou bidd’st me laud my brother Lusians’ glory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“That one praise others’ exploits and renown<span class="linenum">4</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">is honour’d custom which we all desire;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yet fear I ’tis unfit to praise mine own;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lest praise, like this suspect, no trust inspire;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor may I hope to make all matters known</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for Time however long were short: yet, sire!</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as thou commandest all is owed to thee;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>maugre my will I speak and brief will be.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Nay, more, what most obligeth me, in fine,<span class="linenum">5</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">is that no leasing in my tale may dwell;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for of such Feats whatever boast be mine,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when most is told, remaineth much to tell:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But that due order wait on the design,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">e’en as desirest thou to learn full well,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the wide-spread Cont’inent first I’ll briefly trace,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>then the fierce bloody wars that waged my Race.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Atwixt the Zone, where Cancer holds command,—<span class="linenum">6</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_89">[Pg. 89]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the lucent Sun’s septentrional mete,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and that whose frigid horrors freeze the land</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as burns the middle Belt with fervid heat,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lies haughty Europe: On her goodly strand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">facing Arcturus and the Ponent, beat</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the briny billows of Atlantis plain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>while free t’wards Auster flows the Midland-main.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“That part where lovely Dawn is born and bred,<span class="linenum">7</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">neighboureth Asia: But the curvèd river,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-41" id="noteref-41">[41]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from far and frore Rhipæan ranges shed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to feed Mæotis-lake with waves that shiver,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">departs them, and the Sea-strait fierce and dread,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that owned the vict’ory of the Greek deceiver,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where now the seaman sees along the shore</span>
        <br/>
        <span>triumphant Troja’s mem’ories and—no more.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“There farther still the Boreal Pole below,<span class="linenum">8</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hyperboréan mountain-walls appear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and the wild hills where Æolus loves to blow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while of his winds the names they proudly bear:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Here such cold comfort doth Apollo show,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so weak his light and warmth to shine and cheer,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that snows eternal gleam upon the mountains,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>freezeth the sea, and ever freeze the fountains.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Here of the Scythic hordes vast numbers be,<span class="linenum">9</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_90">[Pg. 90]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in olden day a mighty warrior band,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who fought for honours of antiquity</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with the then owners of the Nylus-land:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But how remote their claims from verity,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(for human judgments oft misunderstand),</span>
        <br/>
        <span>let him who seeks what higher lore reveal’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span>ask the red clay that clothes Damascus-field.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-42" id="noteref-42">[42]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Now in these wild and wayward parts be told<span class="linenum">10</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Cold Lapland’s name, uncultivate Norwày,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Escandinavia’s isle, whose scions bold</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">boast triumphs Italy shall ne’er gainsay.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Here, while ne frost, ne wintry rigours hold</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in hand the waters, seafolk ply the way,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>over the arm of rough Sarmatic Main</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Swede, the Brusian,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-43" id="noteref-43">[43]</a> and
          the shiv’ering Dane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Between the sea and Tanaïs-stream we count<span class="linenum">11</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">strange races, Ruthens,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-44" id="noteref-44">[44]</a> Moscows, and Livonians,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Sarmátæ all of old,—and on the Mount</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hercynian,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-45" id="noteref-45">[45]</a>
          Marcomanni, now Polonians.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Holding the empire Almayne paramount</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">dwell Saxons, and Bohemians, and Pannonians;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and other tribes, wherethrough their currents frore</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Rhine, Danube, Amasis,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-46" id="noteref-46">[46]</a> and
          Albis pour.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“’Twixt distant Ister and the famous Strait,<span class="linenum">12</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_91">[Pg. 91]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where hapless Helle left her name and life,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Thracians wone, a folk of brave estate,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Mars’ well-loved country, chosen home of strife:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">There Rhódope and Hæmus rue the weight</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of cursèd Othman’s rule with horror rife;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Byzance they hold beneath their yoke indign</span>
        <br/>
        <span>great injury working to great Constantine!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Hard by their side the Macedonians rest,<span class="linenum">13</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose soil is water’ed by cold Axius’ wave:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-47" id="noteref-47">[47]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Eke ye, of ev’ery choicest realm the best,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Lands of the free, the wise, the good, the brave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that here did breed and bear the facund breast,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and to the world its wit and wisdom gave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>wherewith thou, noble Greece! hast reach’ed the stars,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>no less by arts exalt than arms and wars.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“The Dalmats follow; and upon the Bay<span class="linenum">14</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where rose Antenor’s walls<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-48" id="noteref-48">[48]</a> in while of yore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">superb Venetia builds on wat’ery way,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Adria’s Queen that erst was lowly poor.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hence seawards runs a land-arm made to sway</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">forceful the sons of many a stranger shore;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>an arm of might, whose Race hath conquer’d time</span>
        <br/>
        <span>nor less by spirit than by sword sublime.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Girdeth her shores the kingdom Neptunine,<span class="linenum">15</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_92">[Pg. 92]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while Nature’s bulwarks fence her landward side;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">her middle width departeth Apennine,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by Mars, her saint and patron, glorified:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But when the Porter rose to rank divine,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">she lost her prowess, and her bellic pride:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Humbled she lies with antique puissance spent:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>So Man’s humil’ity may his God content!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Gallia can there be seen, whose name hath flown<span class="linenum">16</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where Cæsar’s triumphs to the world are told;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by Séquana[1] ’tis watered and the Rhone,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by Rhine’s deep current and Garumna<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-49" id="noteref-49">[49]</a> cold:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Here rise the ranges from Pyréne known,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Nymph ensepulchre’d in days of old,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whence, legends say, the conflagrated woods</span>
        <br/>
        <span>rolled golden streams, and flowèd silvern floods.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Lo! here her presence showeth noble Spain,<span class="linenum">17</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Europe’s body corporal the head;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">o’er whose home-rule, and glorious foreign reign,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the fatal Wheel so many a whirl hath made:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Yet ne’er her Past or force or fraud shall stain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor restless Fortune shall her name degrade;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>no bonds her bellic offspring bind so tight</span>
        <br/>
        <span>but it shall burst them with its force of sprite.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“There, facing Tingitania’s shore, she seemeth<span class="linenum">18</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_93">[Pg. 93]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to block and bar the Med’iterranean wave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where the known Strait its name ennobled deemeth</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by the last labour of the Theban Brave.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Big with the burthen of her tribes she teemeth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">circled by whelming waves that rage and rave;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>all noble races of such valiant breast,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that each may justly boast itself the best.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Hers the Tarragonese who, famed in war,<span class="linenum">19</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">made aye-perturbed Parthenopé obey;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the twain Asturias, and the haught Navarre</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">twin Christian bulwarks on the Moslem way:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hers the Gallego canny, and the rare</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Castilian, whom his star raised high to sway</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Spain as her saviour, and his seign’iory feel</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Bætis, Leon, Granáda, and Castile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“See the head-crowning coronet is she,<span class="linenum">20</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of general Europe, Lusitania’s reign,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where endeth land and where beginneth sea,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and Phœbus sinks to rest upon the main.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Willed her the Heavens with all-just decree</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by wars to mar th’ ignoble Mauritan,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to cast him from herself: nor there consent</span>
        <br/>
        <span>he rule in peace the Fiery Continent.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“This is my happy land, my home, my pride;<span class="linenum">21</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_94">[Pg. 94]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where, if the Heav’ens but grant the pray’er I pray</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for glad return and every risk defied,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">there may my life-light fail and fade away.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">This was the Lusitania, name applied</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by Lusus or by Lysa, sons, they say,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of ancient Bacchus, or his boon compeers,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>eke the first dwellers of her eldest years.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Here sprang the Shepherd,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-50" id="noteref-50">[50]</a>
          in whose name we see<span class="linenum">22</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">forecast of virile might, of virtuous meed;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose fame no force shall ever hold in fee,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">since fame of mighty Rome ne’er did the deed.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">This, by light Heaven’s volatile decree,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that antient Scyther, who devours his seed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>made puissant pow’er in many a part to claim,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>assuming regal rank; and thus it came:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“A King there was in Spain, Afonso hight,<span class="linenum">23</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who waged such warfare with the Saracen,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that by his ’sanguined arms, and arts, and might,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he spoiled the lands and lives of many men.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">When from Hercùlean Calpè winged her flight</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his fame to Caucasus Mount and Caspian glen,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>many a Knight, who noblesse coveteth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>comes off’ering service to such King and Death.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“And with intrinsic love inflamèd more<span class="linenum">24</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_95">[Pg. 95]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for the True Faith, than honours popular,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">they troopèd gath’ering from each distant shore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">leaving their dear-loved homes and lands afar.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">When with high feats of force against the Moor</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">they proved of sing’ular worth in Holy War,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>willèd Afonso that their mighty deeds</span>
        <br/>
        <span>commens’urate gifts command and equal meeds.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“’Mid them Henrique, second son, men say,<span class="linenum">25</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of a Hungarian King, well-known and tried,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by sort won Portugal which, in his day,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ne prizèd was ne had fit cause for pride:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">His strong affection stronger to display</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Spanish King decreed a princely bride,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>his only child, Theresa, to the count;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and with her made him Seigneur Paramount.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“This doughty Vassal from that servile horde,<span class="linenum">26</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hagar the handmaid’s seed, great vict’ories won;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">reft the broad lands adjacent with his sword</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and did whatever Brav’ery bade be done:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Him, for his exploits exc’ellent to reward,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">God gave in shortest space a gallant son,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whose arm to ’noble and enfame was fain</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the warlike name of Lusitania’s reign.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Once more at home this conqu’ering Henry stood<span class="linenum">27</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_96">[Pg. 96]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who sacred Hierosol’yma had relievèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his eyes had fed on Jordan’s holy flood,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which the Dear Body of Lord God had lavèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when Godfrey<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-51" id="noteref-51">[51]</a>
          left no foe to be subdued,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and all Judæa conquered was and savèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>many that in his wars had done devoir</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to their own lordships took the way once more.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But when this stout and gallant Hun attainèd<span class="linenum">28</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Life’s fatal period, age and travail-spent,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he gave, by Death’s necessity constrainèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his sprite to Him who had that spirit lent:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">A son of tender years alone remainèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to whom the Sire bequeath’d his ’bodiment;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with bravest braves the youth was formed to cope,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for from such sire such son the world may hope.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Yet old Report, I know not what its weight,<span class="linenum">29</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(for on such antique tale no man relies),<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-52" id="noteref-52">[52]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">saith that the Mother, tane in tow the state,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a second nuptial bed did not despise:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Her orphan son to disinher’ited fate</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">she doomed, declaring hers the dignities,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>not his, with seigniory o’er all the land,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>her spousal dowry by her sire’s command.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Now Prince Afonso (who such style had tane<span class="linenum">30</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_97">[Pg. 97]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in pious mem’ory of his Grandsire’s name)</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">seeing no part and portion in his reign</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">all pilled and plunder’d by the Spouse and Dame,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by dour and doughty Mars inflamed amain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">privily plots his heritage to claim:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>He weighs the causes in his own conceit</span>
        <br/>
        <span>till firm Resolve its fit effect shall greet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Of Guimara’ens the field already flow’d<span class="linenum">31</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with floods of civil warfare’s bloody tide,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where she, who little of the Mother show’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to her own bowels love and land denied.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Fronting the child in fight the parent stood;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor saw her depth of sin that soul of pride</span>
        <br/>
        <span>against her God, against maternal love:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Her sensual passion rose all pow’er above.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“O magical Medea! O Progne dire!<span class="linenum">32</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">if your own babes in vengeance dared ye kill</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for alien crimes, and injuries of the sire,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">look ye, Teresa’s deed was darker still.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Foul greed of gain, incontinent desire,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">were the main causes of such bitter ill:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Scylla her agèd sire for one did slay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for both Teresa did her son betray.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Right soon that noble Prince clear vict’ory won<span class="linenum">33</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_98">[Pg. 98]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from his harsh Mother and her Fere indign;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in briefest time the land obeyed the son,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">though first to fight him did the folk incline.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But reft of reason and by rage undone</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he bound the Mother in the biting chain:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Eftsoons avenged her griefs the hand of God:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Such veneration is to parents owe’d.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Lo! the superb Castilian ’gins prepare<span class="linenum">34</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his pow’er to ’venge Teresa’s injuries,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">against the Lusian land in men so rare,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whereon ne toil ne trouble heavy lies.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Their breasts the cruel battle grandly dare,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">aid the good cause angelic Potencies;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>unrecking might unequal still they strive,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>nay, more, their dreadful foe to flight they drive.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-53" id="noteref-53">[53]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Passeth no tedious time, before the great<span class="linenum">35</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Prince a dure Siege in Guimaraens dree’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by passing pow’er, for to ’mend his state,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">came the fell en’emy, full of grief and greed:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But when committed life to direful Fate,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Egas, the faithful guardian, he was free’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>who had in any other way been lost,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>all unpreparèd ’gainst such ’whelming host.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“But when the loyal Vassal well hath known<span class="linenum">36</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_99">[Pg. 99]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">how weak his Monarch’s arm to front such fight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sans order wending to the Spanish fone,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his Sovran’s homage he doth pledge and plight.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Straight from the horrid siege th’ invader flown</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">trusteth the word and honour of the Knight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Egas Moniz: But now the noble breast</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of the brave Youth disdaineth strange behest.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Already came the plighted time and tide,<span class="linenum">37</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when the Castilian Don stood dight to see,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">before his pow’er the Prince bend low his pride,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yielding the promisèd obediency.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Egás who views his knightly word belied,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while still Castile believes him true to be,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>sweet life resolveth to the winds to throw,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>nor live with foulest taint of faithless vow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“He with his children and his wife departeth<span class="linenum">38</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to keep his promise with a faith immense;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">unshod and strippèd,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-54" id="noteref-54">[54]</a> while their plight imparteth</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">far more of pity than of vengeance:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘If, mighty Monarch! still thy spirit smarteth</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to wreak revenge on my rash confidence,’</span>
        <br/>
        <span>quoth he, ‘behold! I come with life to save</span>
        <br/>
        <span>my pledge, my knightly Honour’s word I gave.’</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘I bring, thou seest here, lives innocent,<span class="linenum">39</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_100">[Pg. 100]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of wife, of sinless children dight to die;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">if breasts of gen’erous mould and excellent</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">accept such weaklings’ woeful destiny.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thou se’est these hands, this tongue inconsequent,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">hereon alone the fierce exper’iment try</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of torments, death, and doom that pass in full</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Sinis or e’en Perillus’ brazen bull.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“As shrifted wight the hangman stands before,<span class="linenum">40</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in life still draining bitter draught of death,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lays throat on block, and of all hope forlore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">expects the blighting blow with bated breath:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">So, in the Prince’s presence angry sore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Egás stood firm to keep his plighted faith:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>When the King, marv’elling at such wondrous truth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>feels anger melt and merge in Royal ruth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Oh the great Portingall-fidelity<span class="linenum">41</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Vassal self-devote to doom so dread!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">What did the Persian more for loyalty</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose gallant hand his face and nostrils shred?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">When great Darius mourned so grievously</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that he a thousand times deep-sighing said,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>far he prefer’d his Zóp’yrus sound again,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>than lord of twenty Babylons to reign.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“But Prince Afonso now prepared his band<span class="linenum">42</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_101">[Pg. 101]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of happy Lusians proud to front the foes,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">those haughty Moors that held the glorious land</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yon side where clear delicious Tagus flows:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now on Ourique<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-55" id="noteref-55">[55]</a>
          field was pitched and plan’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Royal ’Campment fierce and bellicose,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>facing the hostile host of Sarrasin</span>
        <br/>
        <span>though there so many, here so few there bin.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Confident, yet would he in nought confide,<span class="linenum">43</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">save in his God that holds of Heav’en the throne;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so few baptizèd stood their King beside,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">there were an hundred Moors for every one:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Judge any sober judgment, and decide</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’twas deed of rashness or by brav’ery done</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to fall on forces whose exceeding might</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a cent’ury showèd to a single Knight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Order five Moorish Kings the hostile host<span class="linenum">44</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of whom Ismár,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-56" id="noteref-56">[56]</a>
          so called, command doth claim;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">all of long Warfare large experience boast,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wherein may mortals win immortal fame:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And gallant dames the Knights they love the most</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’company, like that brave and beauteous Dame,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>who to beleaguer’d Troy such aidance gave</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with woman-troops that drained Thermòdon’s wave.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“The coolth serene, and early morning’s pride,<span class="linenum">45</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_102">[Pg. 102]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">now paled the sparkling stars about the Pole,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when Mary’s Son appearing crucified</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in vision, strengthened King Afonso’s soul.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But he, adoring such appearance, cried</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">fired with a phrenzied faith beyond control:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>‘To th’ Infidel, O Lord! to th’ Infidel:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-57" id="noteref-57">[57]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span>Not, Lord, to me who know Thy pow’er so well.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Such gracious marvel in such manner sent<span class="linenum">46</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’flamèd the Lusians’ spirits fierce and high,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">towards their nat’ural King, that excellent</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Prince, unto whom love-boon none could deny:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Aligned to front the foeman prepotent,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">they shouted res’onant slogan to the sky,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and fierce the ’larum rose, ‘Real, real,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for high Afonso, King of Portugal!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“As to the fight by calls defied and cries,<span class="linenum">47</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">some fierce Molossan on the wooded height,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">attacks the rampant Bull, who most relies</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on strength of tem’erous horn to force the fight:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now nips the ear, then at the side he flies</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">barking, with more of nimbleness than might,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>till ripped at last the gullet of his foe</span>
        <br/>
        <span>he lays the mighty bulk of monster low:</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“So the new King, inflamed with zeal devout<span class="linenum">48</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_103">[Pg. 103]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for God nor less for faithful Lieges’ sake,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">assails by cunning skill the barb’arous rout</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with Braves the fronting phalanx eath to break:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Whereat the ban-dogs ‘Allah! Allah!’ shout,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and fly to arms; our raging warriors shake</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the lance and bow; resound the trumpet tones;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the musick thunders; Echo moans and groans.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“E’en as the prairie-fire enkindled on<span class="linenum">49</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sun-parchèd steppe (as winn’oweth upper air</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sibilant Boreas), by the blasts swift blown</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">o’er bush and arid brake rains flame and flare:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The shepherd lads and lasses, idly strown</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in rest and gentle slumber, waked by blare</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of crackling conflagration blazing higher,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>hamlet-wards force their flocks to fly the fire:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Th’ astonied Moorman in such startled guise,<span class="linenum">50</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">snatcheth his weapon hast’ily and sans heed;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yet he awaits the fight, nor ever flies,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nay, spurs his battle-ginnet to its speed.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Meet him as rash and swift his enemies</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose piercing lances gar his bosom bleed:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>These fall half-slain, while others flee that can</span>
        <br/>
        <span>convoking aidance of their Alcoran.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“There may be viewèd ’counters madly rash,<span class="linenum">51</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_104">[Pg. 104]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">onsets no Serra’s sturdy strength could stand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while charging here and there the chargers dash,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the gifts of Neptune smiting gravid Land:—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Buffets they deal, and blows that bash and smash,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">burneth and blazeth Warfare’s blasting brand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>but he of Lusus coat, mail, plate of steel,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>hacks, hews, breaks, batters, rives and rends piecemeal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Men’s heads like bullets dance the bloody plain,<span class="linenum">52</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ownerless arms and legs insens’ible lie,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and quiv’ering entrails tell of mortal pain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and faces fade and life’s fair colours fly.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Lost is that impious host, whose heapèd slain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">roll o’er the green’ery rills of crimson dye;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whereby the grasses lose their white and green</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and nought but glow of crimson gore is seen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But now the Lusian victor held the field<span class="linenum">53</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his trophies gath’ering, and his gorgeous prey:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The crusht Hispanian Moor was forced to yield</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while on the plain three days the great King lay.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-58" id="noteref-58">[58]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And now he chargeth on his virgin shield,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">what still assures this well-won Vict’ory.</span>
        <br/>
        <span>five noble inescutcheons azure-hued,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>signing the Moorish Five his sword subdued.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“He paints with bezants five each ’scutcheon,<span class="linenum">54</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_105">[Pg. 105]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the thirty silvers wherewith God was sold,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and various tinctures make His mem’ory known,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose grace and favour did his cause uphold.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Painted on every cinque a cinque is shown;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and, that the thirty may be fully told,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>counteth for two the one that central lies</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of the five azures painted crossy-wise.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Some time has passèd, since this gain had past<span class="linenum">55</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of goodly battail, when the high King hies</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to take Leiría, lately tane and last</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">conquest that boast our conquer’d enemies.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Herewith Arronches castled strong and fast</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">is jointly gainèd with the noble prize</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Scalabicastro,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-59" id="noteref-59">[59]</a> whose fair
          fields amene</span>
        <br/>
        <span>thou, chrystal Tagus! bathest all serene.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Unto this conquered roll of towns his might<span class="linenum">56</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">eke addeth Mafra won in shortest space,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and in the Mountains which the Moon hath hight</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he clasps frore Cintra to his hard embrace;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Cintra, whose Naiads love to hide their light</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by hidden founts and fly the honey’d lace,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which Love hath woven ’mid the hills where flow</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the waters flaming with a living lowe.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“And thou, O noble Lisbon! thou encrown’d<span class="linenum">57</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_106">[Pg. 106]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Princess elect of Cities capital,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">rear’d by the facund Rover-King renown’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose wiles laid low Dardania’s burning wall:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thou, whose commands oblige the Sea’s Profound,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wast taught to bear the Lusitanian’s thrall,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>aided by potent navies at what time</span>
        <br/>
        <span>they came crusading from the Boreal clime.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-60" id="noteref-60">[60]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Beyond Germanic Albis and the Rhene,<span class="linenum">58</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and from Britannia’s misty margin sent,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to waste and slay the people Sarracene,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">many had sailed on holy thoughts intent.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now gained the Tagus-mouth, our stream amene</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to great Afonso’s royal camp they went,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whose lofty fame did thence the Heav’ens invade</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and siege to Ulysséa’s walls they laid.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Five sequent times her front had Luna veilèd,<span class="linenum">59</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">five times her lovely face in full had shown,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when oped her gate the City, which availèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">no Force ’gainst ’sieging forces round her thrown.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Right bloody was th’ assault and fierce th’ assailèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">e’en as their stubborn purpose bound them down;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>asp’erous the Victor, ready all to dare,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Vanquisht, victims of a dire despair.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Thus won she yielded and, in fine, she lay<span class="linenum">60</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_107">[Pg. 107]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">prostrate that City which, in days of old,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the mighty meiny never would obey</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of frigid Scythia’s hordes immanely bold:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Who could so far extend their savage sway,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">till Ebro saw ’t, and Tagus trembling roll’d;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and some o’er Bætis-land, in short, so swept</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that was the region Vandalía ’clept.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“What might of city could perchance endure<span class="linenum">61</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">prowess which proud Lisbóa might not bear?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Who mote resist the powers dure and dour</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of men, whose Fame from earth invadeth air?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now yield obedience all Estremadure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Obidos, Torres Vedras, Alemquer,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where softly plash the musick-murmuring waves,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>’mid rocks and reefs whose feet the torrent laves.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Eke ye, Transtagan lands! ye justly vain<span class="linenum">62</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of flavous Ceres’ bien and bonny boon,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yielded to might above the might of men</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the walls and castles by his valour won:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thou, too, Moor-yeoman! hopest hope insane,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">those riant regions long as lord to own;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for Elvas, Moura, Serpa, well-known sites,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with Alcacer-do-Sal must yield their rights.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“The noble City and sure seat behold,<span class="linenum">63</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_108">[Pg. 108]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">held by Sertorius, rebel famed whilòme;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where now the nitid silv’ery waters cold,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">brought from afar to bless the land and home,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">o’erflow the royal arches hundredfold,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose noble sequence streaks the dark-blue dome;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>not less succumb’d she to her bold pursuer,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to Giraldó, entitled ‘Knight Sans Peur.’<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-61" id="noteref-61">[61]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Fast towards Beja city, vengeful prest,<span class="linenum">64</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to slake his wrath for spoilt Trancoso’s wrong,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-62" id="noteref-62">[62]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Afonso, who despiseth gentle rest</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and would brief human life by Fame prolong.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Feebly resisteth him and his behest</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the City, falling to his arms ere long,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and nought of life within her walls but feel</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the raging victor’s edge of merciless steel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“With these Palmella yielded to the war,<span class="linenum">65</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">piscous Cezimbra, eke, her finny spoils;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">then, aided onwards by his fortunate star,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the King a pow’erful force of foemen foils:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Felt it the City, saw ’t her Lord afar,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who to support and aid her spares no toils,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>along the hill-skirt marching all unware</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of rash encounter lackt he heed and care.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“The King of Bad’ajoz was a Moslem bold,<span class="linenum">66</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_109">[Pg. 109]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with horse four thousand, fierce and furious Knights,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and countless Peons, armed and dight with gold,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose polisht surface glanceth lustrous light.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But as a savage Bull on lonely wold,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whom jealous rage in hot May-month incites,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>sighting a stranger, mad with love and wrath</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the brute blind lover chargeth down the path:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“So doth Afonso, sudden seen the foes<span class="linenum">67</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that urge their forward march securely brave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">strike, slay, and scatter, raining doughty blows;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">flies the Moor King, who recks but self to save:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Naught save a panick fear his spirit knows;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his foll’owers eke to follow only crave;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>while ours, who struck a stroke so sore, so fell,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>were sixty horsemen told in fullest tale.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Victory swift pursuing, rest disdaineth<span class="linenum">68</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the great untiring King; he must’ereth all</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the lieges of his land, whom nought restraineth</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from ever seeking stranger realms to ’thrall.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">He wends to ’leaguer Bad’ajoz, where he gaineth</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his soul’s desire, and battleth at her fall</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with force so fierce, and art and heart so true</span>
        <br/>
        <span>his deeds made others fain to dare and do.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“But the high Godhead, who when man offends,<span class="linenum">69</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_110">[Pg. 110]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so long deservèd penalties delays,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">waiting at times to see him make amends,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">or for deep myst’ery hid from man’s dull gaze;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">if He our valiant King till now defends</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from dangers, facèd fast as foes can raise;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>lends aid no longer, when for vengeance cries</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Mother’s curses who in prison lies;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“For in the City which he compast round,<span class="linenum">70</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">encompast by the Leoneze was he,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">because his conquests trespasst on their ground,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which of Leon and not of Port’ugale be.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Here was his stubborn will right costly found,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as happeth oft in human history,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>an iron maims his legs, as rage-inflamèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to fight he flies and falls a captive maimèd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“O famous Pompey! feel thy Wraith no pain<span class="linenum">71</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to see the fate of noble feats like thine;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor mourn if all-just Nemesis ordain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">thy bays be torn by sire-in-law indign;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">though Phasis frore and parcht Syéné-plain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose perpendic’ular shadows ne’er decline,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Bootes’ ice-bergs, and Equator-fires,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>confess the terrors which thy name inspires;</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Tho’ rich Arabia, and the brood ferocious<span class="linenum">72</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_111">[Pg. 111]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Heniochs, with Colchis-region known of yore</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for Golden Fleece; and though the Cappadoces</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and Júdeans who One only God adore;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">tho’ soft Sophénes,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-63" id="noteref-63">[63]</a> and the race atrocious,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Cilician, with Armenia whence outpour</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the twain of mighty streams, whose farthest fount</span>
        <br/>
        <span>hides in a higher and a holier Mount;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-64" id="noteref-64">[64]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“And though, in fine, from far Atlantic tide<span class="linenum">73</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">E’en to the Taurus, Scythia’s tow’ering wall,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">all saw thee conquer; fearless still abide</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">if none save Emath-field beheld thee fall:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thou shalt behold Afonso’s ovant pride,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lie subjugate, that subjugated all.</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Such fate Celestial Counsel long foresaw</span>
        <br/>
        <span>thine from a sire, his from a son-in-law.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Returned the King sublime, in fine, with sprite<span class="linenum">74</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by the just doom of Judge divine chastisèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and when of Santarem in pride of might</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Saracen a bootless siege devisèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and when of Vincent, martyr benedight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the precious Corse by Christian people prizèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>from Sacrum Promontorium<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-65" id="noteref-65">[65]</a>
          was conveyed</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and reverent-wise in Ulysséa laid:</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Faster to push the projects still in hand,<span class="linenum">75</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_112">[Pg. 112]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the toil-spent Father sent his stout young son,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">bidding him pass to Alemtejo’s land,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with warlike gear and soldiers many a one.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Sancho, a sov’ereign wielder of the brand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">straight forward passing, gore-red gars to run</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the stream<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-66" id="noteref-66">[66]</a> whose waters
          feed Seville and flood,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>dyed by the brutish Moormen’s barb’rous blood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“With hunger whetted by this new success,<span class="linenum">76</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">now resteth not the Youth till sight his eyes</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">another slaughter, sore as this, oppress</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the barb’rous host that circling Beja lies:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Not long the Prince whom fortune loves to bless,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">waits the fair end where leads his dear emprize.</span>
        <br/>
        <span>But now the routed Moors to vengeance cleave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>their only hope such losses to retrieve.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“They crowd the mighty Mount whereof Meduse<span class="linenum">77</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">robbèd his body who the skies upbore:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">They flock in thousands from Cape Ampeluse</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and from Tangier, Antæus’ seat of yore.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Abyla’s<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-67" id="noteref-67">[67]</a> dweller
          offereth scant excuse;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who with his weapon hasteth him the more,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when heard the Moorish clarions shrilly-tonèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and all the reign high Juba whilom ownèd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span class="pagenum" id="Page_113">[Pg 113]</span> <br/>
        <span>“The Mir-almuminin,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-68" id="noteref-68">[68]</a> who led
          the throng,<span class="linenum">78</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from the Dark Cont’inent past to Portugal:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thirteen Moor kings he led, high, haught, and strong,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to his Imperial sceptre subject all:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thus wreaking forceful every tyrant Wrong,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wherever easy Wrong mote sate his gall,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Sancho in Santarem he flies t’ invest,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>yet his was hardly of success the best.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Gives asp’erous battle, fighting fury-fraught<span class="linenum">79</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the hateful Moor a thousand feints designing;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ne horrid catapult avails him aught,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ne forceful batt’ering-ram, ne hidden mining:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Afonso’s son, conserving force and thought,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and firm resolve with warlike skill combining,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>foreseeth all with prudent heart and art,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and stern resistance brings to every part.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But now the Vet’ran,—doomed by years to ease<span class="linenum">80</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and gentle rest, from life of toil and teen,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">be’ing in the city,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-69" id="noteref-69">[69]</a> down whose pastured leas</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Mondego’s wavelets kiss the hem of green;—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when learnt how close his son beleaguer’d is</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in Santarem by Moormen blind with spleen,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>close from the City flies the fone to meet,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>age-idlesse spurning with fast eager feet.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“He heads his army, tried in war and known,<span class="linenum">81</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_114">[Pg. 114]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his son to succour; and his well-led host</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">shows wonted Port’ingall-fury all their own,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">till in brief time the Moor is broke and lost.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The Battle-plain,—whose blood-stained front is strown</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with steely coats, and caps of varied cost,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>horse, charger, harness, rich and worthy prize,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>heaped with their owners’ mangled corpses lies.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Forth fares the remnant of the Paynimry<span class="linenum">82</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from Lusitania, hurled in headlong flight:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But Mir-almuminin may never flee,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for ere he flee his life hath fled the light.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">To Him whose arm vouchsafed such Victory</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in praise and stintless prayer our hosts unite:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Chances so passing strange make clear to ken</span>
        <br/>
        <span>God’s arm smites sorer than all arms of men.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Such crown of conquest still bedeckt the brow<span class="linenum">83</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of old Afonso, Lord of lofty fame;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when he, in fine, who ever foiled his foe,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">was foiled by antient Time’s unyielding claim:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Past the death-sickness o’er his pallid brow</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">its frigid hand, and wrung his feeble frame;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and thus the debt on mortal shoulders laid</span>
        <br/>
        <span>his years to gloomy Libitína paid.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“His loss the lofty Promontories mourn,<span class="linenum">84</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_115">[Pg. 115]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and from the wavy rivers floods of grief</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with lakelets overspread the fieldèd corn,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and trickling tears are sorrow’s sole relief:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But ring so loud o’er Earth’s extremest bourne</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the fame and exploits of our great lost chief,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that evermore shall Echo for his reign</span>
        <br/>
        <span>‘Afonso! Afonso!’ cry, and cry in vain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Sancho, his lusty son, the worthy heir<span class="linenum">85</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of his great Father’s valour, force and might,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as did his early doings clear declare,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when Bætis<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-70" id="noteref-70">[70]</a> fled
          ensanguin’d from the fight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and from Andalusía forced to fare</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the barb’arous King and peoples Ishmaelite;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and more, when they who vainly Beja girt</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of his shrewd blows themselves had borne the hurt:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“After he had been raised to Royal hest,<span class="linenum">86</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and held for years a few his father’s land,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he wends the city Sylves to invest,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">plowèd whose plain the barb’arous peasant’s hand:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">With allies val’orous was his daring blest</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the sturdy Germans, whose Armada man’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by furnisht host was flying o’er the wave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the lost Judæa to regain and save.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“To join in holy enterprize they went<span class="linenum">87</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_116">[Pg. 116]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Red Frederick, who did first to move begin</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his mighty armament and succour sent</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to ward the town where <span class="smcap">Christ</span> had died for
          men;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">When Guy, whose Croisers were by thirst bespent,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yielded his sword to gallant Saladin</span>
        <br/>
        <span>there, where the Moslem host was well supplied</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with wat’ery store to those of Guy denied.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-71" id="noteref-71">[71]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But that majestical Armade that came<span class="linenum">88</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by dint of storm-wind o’er the Lisbon bar,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">would aid our Sancho the foul foe to tame,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">all being bounden for the Holy War:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">As to his Father, happed to him the same;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and Lisbon fell to fortunes similar;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>aided by Germans, Sylves town he takes</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and the fierce dweller slays or subject makes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“And if so many trophies from Mahound<span class="linenum">89</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his valour snatchèd, eke denies his pride</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Leoneze in peace to till their ground,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whom Mart with martial usage loved to guide:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Till on the bended neck his yoke he bound</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of haughty Túi and all its country-side;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where many a city felt the dreaded blow</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which with thine arms thou, Sancho! broughtest low.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“But ’mid his many palms this Prince waylaid<span class="linenum">90</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_117">[Pg. 117]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the stroke of tem’erous Death; his heir prefer’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">was that esteemèd son whom all obey’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">second Afonso, of our Kings the third.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">He reigning, Alcacér-do-Sal was made</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ours, snatcht for ever from the Moorish herd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that erst was taken by the Moor beset,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and now parforce he pays of Death the Debt.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Afonso dying, straight to him succeedeth<span class="linenum">91</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a second Sancho, easy-going soul,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who in his weakling idlesse so exceedeth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the rulèd rule their ruler and their tool:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">He lost the Reign, for which another pleadeth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by private preference deprived of rule;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>since, govern’d only by his minions’ will</span>
        <br/>
        <span>he made him partner in their works of ill.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Yet ne’er was Sancho, no, such profl’igate pest<span class="linenum">92</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as was that Nero wedded with a boy,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who in foul incest showing horrid zest</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his mother Agrippina dared enjoy;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Ne’er with strange cruel arts did he molest</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the liege, nor gar’d the torch his town destroy;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>he was no waster, no Heliogabálus,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-72" id="noteref-72">[72]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span>no woman-king like soft Sardanapálus.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Ne’er was his tyr’annised people so chastisèd<span class="linenum">93</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_118">[Pg. 118]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as wretched Sicill by her tyrant bane;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ne like the despot Phálaris, he devisèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">novel inventions for inhuman pain:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But his high-hearted realm, which ever prizèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lords of the highest hopes and sovran strain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>would ne’er whole-soulèd such a King obey,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>who showed not fittest for the kingly sway.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Hence came the gov’ernance of the reign to right<span class="linenum">94</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the County Bolognese; and he arose</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">at length to kingship, when from life took flight</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his brother Sancho sunk in soft repose.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">This, whom the ‘Brave Afonso’ subjects hight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when fenced his kingdom from internal foes,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>strives to dilate it; what his Sire possest</span>
        <br/>
        <span>is worlds too narrow for so big a breast.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Of both Algarves, given to his hand<span class="linenum">95</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in gift of bridal dowry, greater part</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his arm recovers, and outdrives the band</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Moors ill-treated now by hostile Mart.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">He freed and made the Mistress of her Land</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our Lusitania, such his bellic art;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>till final ruin whelmed the mighty hordes</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where’er Earth ownèd Lusus’ subjects lords.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“See, next that Diniz comes in whom is seen<span class="linenum">96</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_119">[Pg. 119]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the ‘brave Afonso’s’ offspring true and digne;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whereby the mighty boast obscurèd been,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the vaunt of lib’eral Alexander’s line:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Beneath his sceptre blooms the land serene</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(already compast golden Peace divine)</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with constitution, customs, laws and rights,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a tranquil country’s best and brightest lights.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“The first was he who made Coimbra own<span class="linenum">97</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Pallas-Minerva’s gen’erous exercise;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he called the Muses’ choir from Helicon</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to tread the lea that by Mondego lies:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Whate’er of good whilere hath Athens done,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">here proud Apollo keepeth ev’ery prize:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Here gives he garlands wove with golden ray,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with perfumed Nard and ever-verdant Bay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Brave towns and cities reared his hand anew,<span class="linenum">98</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">stout fortalice, and strongly-castled mure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while his well-nigh reformèd kingdom grew</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with stalwart towers and lofty walls secure:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But when dure Atropos cut short the clew,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and shore the thin-spun thread of life mature,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>arose, to filial duty nidering</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the fourth Afonso, yet a brave good King.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“This proud Castile’s bravades with equal pride<span class="linenum">99</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_120">[Pg. 120]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">despised, of soul and breast serenely grand;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for aye the Lusitanian’s sprite defied</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">fear of the strongest, though the smaller band:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But when the Mauritanian races hied</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to win and wear Hesperia’s winsome land,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and marchèd boldly to debel Castile</span>
        <br/>
        <span>superb Afonso went to work her weal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Ne’er did Semiramis such myriads see<span class="linenum">100</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who o’er the wide Hydaspick prairie trod;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor Attila,—who daunteth Italy</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with dreadful boast, self-titled ‘Scourge of God,’—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">hurried such Gothick hosts to victory,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as the wild Saracens’ stupendous crowd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with all th’ excessive might Granáda yields</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that flockt to battle on Tartessus’ fields.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“When saw Castilia’s monarch, high and haught,<span class="linenum">101</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">such force inexpugnable fain of strife,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">dreading lest all Hispania come to naught,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">once lost ere this,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-73" id="noteref-73">[73]</a> far more than loss of life;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">aid of our Lusian chivalry he sought</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and sent the summons by his dearest wife,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>his spouse who sends her, and the joy and pride</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of the fond Father to whose realm she hied.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Enter’d Maria, fairest of the fair,<span class="linenum">102</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_121">[Pg. 121]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">her Father’s palace-halls of tow’ering height;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lovely her gest though joy was crusht by care</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that brimmed her beauteous eyes with tears that blight:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and waved her glorious wealth of golden hair</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">o’er neck and shoulders iv’ory-smooth and white:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Before her gladly-greeting Sire she stood,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and told her mission in this melting mood:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Whatever various races Earth hath borne,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-74" id="noteref-74">[74]</a><span class="linenum">103</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the fierce strange peoples of all Africk-land</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">leadeth Marocco’s mighty Monarch, sworn</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our noble Spain to conquer and command:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Power like this ne’er met beneath the Morn</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">since bitter Ocean learnt to bathe the strand:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>They bring such fierceness and a rage so dread</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Living shake and quake the buried Dead.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘He to whose arms thou gavest me to wife,<span class="linenum">104</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his land defending when such foes invade,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">offers himself, o’erfeeble for the strife,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to the hard mercies of the Moorish blade;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">if, Sire! thou deign not aid that all-dear life,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">me shalt thou see from out the kingdom fade,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>widowèd, wretched, doomed to lot obscure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>sans realm, sans husband, e’en sans life secure.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘Wherefore, O King! of whom for purest fear,<span class="linenum">105</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_122">[Pg. 122]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Mulucha’s<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-75" id="noteref-75">[75]</a>
          currents in their course congeal;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">cast from thee dull delay, rise, swift appear</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a second Saviour to our sad Castile:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">If this thy count’enance, beaming love so dear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">set on a Father’s fond proud heart its seal,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>haste, Father! succour, an thou hasten not,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>haply he faileth who thy succour sought.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Not otherwise fear-filled Maria spake<span class="linenum">106</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">her Sire, than Venus when, in saddest strain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">she pled to great All-Father for the sake</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of her Æneas tossing on the Main;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and in Jove’s breast could such compassion ’wake,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his dreadful thunders from his hand fall vain:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>The clement Godhead all to her concedeth</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and mourneth only that no more she needeth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But now the squadded warriors muster dense<span class="linenum">107</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on Eborensian plains with fierce array;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">glint in the sun-glare harness, sword, spear, lance,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and richly furnisht destriers prance and neigh:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The banner’d trumpets with a blast advance,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">rousing men’s bosoms from the gentle sway</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of holy Peace to dire refulgent arms,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and down the dales reverb’erate War’s alarms.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-76" id="noteref-76">[76]</a></span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Majestic marcheth, girt by all his powers,<span class="linenum">108</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_123">[Pg. 123]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">th’ insignia of his Royal state among,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">valiant Afonso, and his tall form towers</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by neck and shoulders taller than the throng;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his gest alone embraves the heart that cowers,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in his stout presence wax the weaklings strong:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Thus to Castilia’s realm he leads his band,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with his fair daughter, Ladye of the Land.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“In fine when met the Kings, Afonsos twain,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-77" id="noteref-77">[77]</a><span class="linenum">109</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">upon Tarifa’s field, they stand to front</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that swarming host of stone-blind heathen men,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for whom are small the meadows and the mount.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">No sprite there liveth of so tough a grain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but feels its faith and trust of small account,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>did it not clearly see and fully know,</span>
        <br/>
        <span><span class="smcap">Christ</span> by His servants’ arms shall smite the
          foe.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“The seed of Hagar laughing, as it were,<span class="linenum">110</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to view the Christian pow’er so weak, so mean;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">begins the lands, as though their own, to share</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ere won, among the conqu’ering Hagarene;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">such forgèd title and false style they bear</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">claiming the famous name of Saracene:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Thus with false reck’oning would they strip and spoil</span>
        <br/>
        <span>calling it theirs, that noble alien soil.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“E’en so the barb’arous Giant huge and gaunt,<span class="linenum">111</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_124">[Pg. 124]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with cause to royal Saul so dread appearing</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when seen the swordless Shepherd stand afront,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">armed but with pebbles and with heart unfearing;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">launchèd his sneer of pride and arr’ogant taunt</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">at the weak youngling’s humble raiment jeering,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>who, whirled the sling, soon read the lesson well,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>how much shall Faith all human force excel:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Thus do the Moormen, traitor-souls, despise<span class="linenum">112</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our Christian forces, nor can understand</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">how Heav’en’s high fortress wonted aid affies,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which e’en horrific Hell may not withstand:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">On this and on his skill Castile relies,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">falls on Marocco’s King, strikes hand to hand:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>The Portingall, who holds all danger light,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>makes the Granádan kingdom fear his might.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Behold! the brandisht blade and lance at rest,<span class="linenum">113</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">rang loud on coat and crest, a wild onsèt!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">They cried, as each his several law confest,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">these ‘Sanct’ Thiago!’ and those ‘Mahomet!’</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The cries of wounded men the skies opprest,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose flowing blood in ugly puddles met,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where other half-slain wretches drowning lay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>who dragged their shatter’d limbs from out the fray.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“With such prevailing force the Lusian fought<span class="linenum">114</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_125">[Pg. 125]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Gránadil, that in the shortest space</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">an utter ruin of his host was wrought;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ne fence, ne steely plate our strokes could face:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">With such triumphant Vict’ory cheaply bought</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">unsatisfied, the Strong Arm<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-78" id="noteref-78">[78]</a> flies apace,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and timely aids Castilia’s toiling pow’er,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>still mixt in doubtful conflict with the Moor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Now brightly burning Sol had housed his wain<span class="linenum">115</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in Thetis’ bower, and his slanting ray</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sank westward, bearing Hesper in his train,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to close that rare and most memorious day:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">When of the Moors those valiant Sovrans twain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the dense and dreadful squadrons swept away,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with such fell slaughter as ne’er told of Man</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the page of Story since the world began.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Ne’er could strong Marius e’en the quarter show,<span class="linenum">116</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of lives here victim’d by victorious Fate;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when to the river, red with gory glow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he sent his thirsty Braves their drouth to sate:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Ne yet the Carthaginian, asp’erous foe</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to Roman pow’er and cradled in her hate,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when slain so many Knights of noble Rome,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of their gold rings he sent three bushels home.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“And if sole thou so many souls to flit<span class="linenum">117</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_126">[Pg. 126]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">couldst force, and seek Cocytus’ reign of night,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when thou the Holy City didst acquit</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of the base Júdean, firm in olden rite;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’twas that Jehovah’s vengeance thus saw fit,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">O noble Titus! not thine arm of might;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for thus inspirèd men had prophesied,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and thus by <span class="smcap">Jesu’s</span> lips ’twas certified.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Accomplishèd his act of arms victorious,<span class="linenum">118</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">home to his Lusian realm Afonso sped,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to gain from Peace-tide triumphs great and glorious,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as those he gained in wars and battles dread;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-79" id="noteref-79">[79]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when the sad chance, on History’s page memorious,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which can unsepulchre the sheeted dead,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>befel that ill-starr’d miserable Dame</span>
        <br/>
        <span>who, foully slain, a thronèd Queen became.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Thou, only thou, pure Love, whose cruel might<span class="linenum">119</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">obligeth human hearts to weal and woe,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">thou, only thou, didst wreak such foul despight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as though she were some foul perfidious foe.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thy burning thirst, fierce Love, they say aright,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">may not be quencht by saddest tears that flow;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>nay, more, thy sprite of harsh tyrannick mood</span>
        <br/>
        <span>would see thine altars bathed with human blood.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“He placed thee, fair Ignèz! in soft retreat,<span class="linenum">120</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_127">[Pg. 127]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">culling the first-fruits of thy sweet young years,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in that delicious Dream, that dear Deceit,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose long endurance Fortune hates and fears:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hard by Mondego’s yearned-for meads thy seat,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where linger, flowing still, those lovely tears,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>until each hill-born tree and shrub confest</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the name of Him deep writ within thy breast.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-80" id="noteref-80">[80]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“There, in thy Prince awoke responsive-wise<span class="linenum">121</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">dear thoughts of thee which soul-deep ever lay;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which brought thy beauteous form before his eyes,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whene’er those eyne of thine were far away:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Night fled in falsest, sweetest phantasies,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in fleeting, flying reveries sped the Day;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and all, in fine, he saw or cared to see</span>
        <br/>
        <span>were memories of his love, his joys, his thee.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Of many a dainty dame and damosel<span class="linenum">122</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the coveted nuptial couches he rejecteth;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for nought can e’er, pure Love! thy care dispel,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when one enchanting shape thy heart subjecteth.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">These whims of passion to despair compel</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Sire, whose old man’s wisdom aye respecteth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>his subjects murmuring at his son’s delay</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to bless the nation with a bridal day.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“To wrench Ignèz from life he doth design,<span class="linenum">123</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_128">[Pg. 128]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">better his captured son from her to wrench;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">deeming that only blood of death indign</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the living lowe of such true Love can quench.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">What Fury willed it that the steel so fine,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which from the mighty weight would never flinch</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of the dread Moorman, should be drawn in hate</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to work that hapless delicate Ladye’s fate?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“The horr’ible Hangmen hurried her before<span class="linenum">124</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the King, now moved to spare her innocence;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but still her cruel murther urged the more,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the People swayed by fierce and false pretence.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">She with her pleadings pitiful and sore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that told her sorrows and her care immense</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for her Prince-spouse and babes, whom more to leave</span>
        <br/>
        <span>than her own death the mother’s heart did grieve:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“And heav’enwards to the clear and chryst’alline skies,<span class="linenum">125</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">raising her eyne with piteous tears bestainèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">her eyne, because her hands with cruel ties</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">one of the wicked Ministers<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-81" id="noteref-81">[81]</a> constrainèd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And gazing on her babes in wistful guise,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose pretty forms she loved with love unfeignèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whose orphan’d lot the Mother filled with dread,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>unto their cruel grandsire thus she said,—</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘If the brute-creatures, which from natal day<span class="linenum">126</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_129">[Pg. 129]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on cruel ways by Nature’s will were bent;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">or feral birds whose only thought is prey,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">upon aërial rapine all intent;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">if men such salvage be’ings have seen display</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to little children loving sentiment,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>e’en as to Ninus’ mother did befall,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and to the twain who rear’d the Roman wall:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘O thou, who bear’st of man the gest and breast,<span class="linenum">127</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(an it be manlike thus to draw the sword</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on a weak girl, because her love imprest</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his heart, who took her heart and love in ward);</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">respect for these her babes preserve, at least!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">since it may not her òbscure death retard:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Moved be thy pitying soul for them and me,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>although my faultless fault unmoved thou see!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘And if thou know’est to deal in direful fight<span class="linenum">128</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the doom of brand and blade to Moorish host,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">know also thou to deal of life the light</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to one who ne’er deserved her life be lost:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But an thou wouldst mine inn’ocence thus requite,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">place me for aye on sad exilèd coast,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>in Scythian sleet, on seething Libyan shore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with life-long tears to linger evermore.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘Place me where beasts with fiercest rage abound,—<span class="linenum">129</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_130">[Pg. 130]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Lyons and Tygers,—there, ah! let me find</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">if in their hearts of flint be pity found,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">denied to me by heart of humankind.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">There with intrinsic love and will so fond</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for him whose love is death, there will I tend</span>
        <br/>
        <span>these tender pledges whom thou see’st; and so</span>
        <br/>
        <span>shall the sad mother cool her burning woe.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Inclin’ed to pardon her the King benign,<span class="linenum">130</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">moved by this sad lament to melting mood;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but the rude People and Fate’s dure design</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(that willed it thus) refused the pardon sued:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">They draw their swords of steely temper fine,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">they who proclaim as just such deed of blood:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Against a ladye, caitiff, felon wights!</span>
        <br/>
        <span>how showed ye here, brute beasts or noble knights?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Thus on Polyxena, that beauteous maid,<span class="linenum">131</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">last solace of her mother’s age and care,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when doom’d to die by fierce Achilles’ shade,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the cruel Pyrrhus hasted brand to bare:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But she (a patient lamb by death waylaid),</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with the calm glances which serene the air,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>casts on her mother, mad with grief, her eyes</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and silent waits that awesome sacrifice.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Thus dealt with fair Ignèz the murth’erous crew,<span class="linenum">132</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_131">[Pg. 131]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in th’ alabastrine neck that did sustain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the charms whereby could Love the love subdue</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of him, who crown’d her after death his Queen;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">bathing their blades; the flow’ers of snowy hue,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which often water’ed by her eyne had been,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>are blood-dyed; and they burn with blinding hate,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>reckless of tortures stor’d for them by Fate.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Well mightest shorn of rays, O Sun! appear<span class="linenum">133</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to fiends like these on day so dark and dire;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as when Thyestes ate the meats that were</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his seed, whom Atreus slew to spite their sire.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And you, O hollow Valleys! doomed to hear</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">her latest cry from stiffening lips expire,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>her Pedro’s name,—did catch that mournful sound,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whose echoes bore it far and far around!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“E’en as a Daisy sheen, that hath been shorn<span class="linenum">134</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in time untimely, floret fresh and fair,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and by untender hand of maiden torn</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to deck the chaplet for her wreathèd hair;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">gone is its odour and its colours mourn;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so pale and faded lay that Ladye there;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>dried are the roses of her check, and fled</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the white live colour, with her dear life dead.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Mondego’s daughter-Nymphs the death obscure<span class="linenum">135</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_132">[Pg. 132]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wept many a year, with wails of woe exceeding;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and for long mem’ry changed to fountain pure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the floods of grief their eyes were ever feeding:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The name they gave it, which doth still endure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">revived Ignèz, whose murthered love lies bleeding,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>see yon fresh fountain flowing ’mid the flowers,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>tears are its waters, and its name “Amores!”<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-82" id="noteref-82">[82]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Time ran not long, ere Pedro saw the day<span class="linenum">136</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of vengeance dawn for wounds that ever bled;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who, when he took in hand the kingly sway,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">eke took the murth’erers who his rage had fled:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Them a most cruel Pedro did betray;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for both, if human life the foemen dread,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>made concert savage and dure pact, unjust as</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Lepidus made with Anth’ony and Augustus.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“This in his judgments rig’orous and severe,<span class="linenum">137</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">plunder, advoutries, murtherers supprest:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">To stay with cruel grasp Crime’s dark career,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">bred sole assurèd solace in his breast:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">A Justiciary, not by love but fear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he guarded Cities from haught tyrant-pest;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>their doom more robbers dree’d by his decrees</span>
        <br/>
        <span>than Theseus slew, or vagueing Hercules.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Pedro, the harshly just, begets the bland,<span class="linenum">138</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_133">[Pg. 133]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(see what exceptions lurk in Nature’s laws!)</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">remiss, and all-regardless prince, Fernand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who ran his realm in danger’s open jaws:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">For soon against the weak, defenceless land</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">came the Castilian, who came nigh to cause</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the very ruin of the Lusian reign;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for feeble Kings enfeeble strongest strain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Or ’twas the wages Sin deserves of Heaven,<span class="linenum">139</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that filchèd Léonor from marriage bed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by false, misunderstood opinions driven</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">another’s wife, a leman-bride to wed;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Or ’twas because his easy bosom given</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to vice and vileness, and by both misled,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>waxèd effeminate weak; which may be true,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-83" id="noteref-83">[83]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span>for low-placed loves the highest hearts subdue.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Of such offences ever paid the pain<span class="linenum">140</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">many, whom God allowed or willèd He;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">those who fared forth to force the fair Helèn;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Appius and Tarquin, eke, such end did see:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Say, why should David of the saintly strain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so blame himself? What felled th’ illustrious tree</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of Benjamin? Full well the truth design a</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Pharaoh for Sara, Sichem for a Dinah.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“But if so weakeneth forceful human breast<span class="linenum">141</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_134">[Pg. 134]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">illicit Love, which spurns the golden mean,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">well in Alcmené’s son we find the test</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as Omphalé disguis’ed to hero-quean.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Anthony’s fame a shade of shame confest,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to Cleopatra bound by love too keen;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>nor less thou, Punick victor! wast betray’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by low allegiance to some Puglian maid.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Yet say who, peradventure, shall secure<span class="linenum">142</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his soul from Cupid armed with artful snare</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’mid the live roses, human snow so pure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the gold and alabaster chrystal-clare?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who ’scapeth Beauty’s wiles and per’egrine lure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the true Medusa-face so awful fair,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which man’s imprison’d, witch-bound heart can turn</span>
        <br/>
        <span>no, not to stone, but flames that fiercely burn?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Who se’eth a firm-fixt glance, a gesture bland,<span class="linenum">143</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">soft promises of angel-excellence,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the soul transforming aye by charmed command;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">say, who from pow’er like this can find defence?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Pardie, he scantly blameth King Fernand</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who pays, as he did, Love’s experience:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>But human Judgment would, if fancy-free,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>adjudge his laches even worse to be.</span>
      </p>
      </div></blockquote>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-iii-endnotes">

      <h4>Canto III. Endnotes.</h4>

      <ol start="41">

      <li id="note-41"><p>Tanais, the Don. <a href="#noteref-41" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-42"><p>Whence Adam (“red man”). <a href="#noteref-42" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-43"><p>Ruthenians = Eastern Galicians. <a href="#noteref-43" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-44"><p>Amisius or Amisia (Ems). <a href="#noteref-44" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-45"><p>Borussians = Prussians. <a href="#noteref-45" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-46"><p>Harz and Erzgebirge. <a href="#noteref-46" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-47"><p><i><abbr>Hod.</abbr></i> Vardari or Bradi. <a href="#noteref-47" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-48"><p>Padua. <a href="#noteref-48" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-49"><p>Seine and Garonne. <a href="#noteref-49" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-50"><p>Viriatus = vir, vires, virtus (<i>paronomasia</i>). <a href="#noteref-50" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-51"><p>De Bouillon, crowned first king of Jerusalem, <span class="allsmcap"><abbr title="Anno Domini">A.D.</abbr></span> 1099. <a href="#noteref-51" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-52"><p>The favourite figure <i>correctio</i>. <a href="#noteref-52" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-53"><p>Valdevez, or Campo da Matança, <span class="allsmcap"><abbr title="Anno Domini">A.D.</abbr></span> 1128 (Canto IV. 16). <a href="#noteref-53" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-54"><p><i>i.e.</i>, of festal garb (Canto VIII. 14). <a href="#noteref-54" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-55"><p>Battle of Ourique, <span class="allsmcap"><abbr title="Anno Domini">A.D.</abbr></span> 1139. <a href="#noteref-55" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-56"><p>Isma’il = Ishmael. <a href="#noteref-56" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-57"><p><i>i.e.</i>, disclose Thyself, show a sign. <a href="#noteref-57" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-58"><p>The conqueror’s custom. <a href="#noteref-58" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-59"><p><abbr title="Saint">St.</abbr> Irene, Sanctarem, Santarem. <a href="#noteref-59" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-60"><p>Second Crusade, <span class="allsmcap"><abbr title="Anno Domini">A.D.</abbr></span> 1147. <a href="#noteref-60" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-61"><p>Giraldo Sem-Pavor, who took Evora. <a href="#noteref-61" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-62"><p>Burnt by the Moors. <a href="#noteref-62" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-63"><p>Syrians. <a href="#noteref-63" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-64"><p>The Ararat of fiction. <a href="#noteref-64" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-65"><p>Cape <abbr title="Saint">St.</abbr> Vincent. <a href="#noteref-65" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-66"><p>The Guadalquivir. <a href="#noteref-66" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-67"><p>African Ceuta, opposite Gibraltar. <a href="#noteref-67" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-68"><p>The Emperor of Marocco. <a href="#noteref-68" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-69"><p>Coimbra. <a href="#noteref-69" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-70"><p>The Guadiana river. <a href="#noteref-70" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-71"><p>The Battle of the “Horns of Hattin.” <a href="#noteref-71" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-72"><p><i>Sic</i> in <abbr title="original">orig.</abbr> <a href="#noteref-72" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-73"><p>By <abbr title="Dom">D.</abbr> Roderick the Goth. <a href="#noteref-73" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-74"><p>Begins vehemently—<i lang="la">ex abrupto</i>. <a href="#noteref-74" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-75"><p>The Lixus river, now Al-kús of Marocco. <a href="#noteref-75" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-76"><p>Battle of Tarifa or Rio Salado, <span class="allsmcap"><abbr title="Anno Domini">A.D.</abbr></span> 1340. <a href="#noteref-76" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-77"><p>Fourth of Portugal and eleventh of Castile. <a href="#noteref-77" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-78"><p><i>i.e.</i>, Portuguese Afonso. <a href="#noteref-78" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-79"><p>“Peace with honour.” <a href="#noteref-79" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-80"><p>Writing his name upon the tree-trunks and leaves. <a href="#noteref-80" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-81"><p><i>In <abbr title="original">orig.</abbr></i>, <i lang="pt">Ministros</i>, <i>i.e.</i> of wrath (?) <a href="#noteref-81" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-82"><p>The famous <i lang="pt">Fonte-dos-Amores</i>, near Coimbra. <a href="#noteref-82" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-83"><p><i lang="pt">E bem parece</i>,—ambiguous. <a href="#noteref-83" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>
      </ol>
    </section>
  </section>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

  <section id="canto-iv">

    <h3>Canto IV.</h3>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-iv-argument">
      <h4>Argument<br/>
        of the Fourth Canto.</h4>

      <p class="continued">Da Gama pursueth his discourse with the King of Melinde, and relateth
        the wars between Portugal and Castile, touching the succession to the
        throne, after the death of the king, <abbr title="Dom">D.</abbr> Fernando: Military feats of the
        Constable, <abbr title="Dom">D.</abbr> Nuno Alvares Pereira: Battle and victory of Aljubarrota:
        Diligent attempts to discover India by land, in the days of the king <abbr title="Dom">D.</abbr> Joam II.: How the king <abbr title="Dom">D.</abbr> Manoel gained this end by resolving upon the
        present voyage: Preparations for it: Embarkation and farewells of the
        navigators upon the Belem beach.</p>

    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-iv-another-argument">

      <h4>Another Argument.</h4>

      <blockquote class="italics poetry" lang="pt"><div>
        <p>
          <span>Acclamado João, de Pedro herdeiro,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Convoca Leonor ao Castelhano:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Oppoem-se Nuno, intrepido guerreiro;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Da-se batalha, vence o Lusitano:</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Quem a Aurora buscar tentou primeiro</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Pelas tumidas ondas do Oceano;</span>
          <br/>
          <span>E como ao Gama coube esta alta empreza,</span>
          <br/>
          <span>Por affinar a gloria Portugueza.</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>

      <table class="table-poetry">
        <tbody>
          <tr>
            <td>Joam acclaimèd to be Pedro’s heir,</td>
            <td>(1–5)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Léonor craveth aidance of Castile:</td>
            <td>(6–13)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Withstandeth Nuno, warrior sans fear,</td>
            <td>(14–22)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>They fight; and conquest crowns the Lusian’s weal:</td>
            <td>(23–47)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Who first went forth the Morning-land to spere</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(60–66)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>And through the tumid flood his way to feel;</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>And how to Gama fell the great emprize,</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(77–End)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>To gar our Port’ugal’s glory higher rise.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-iv-body">
      <h4>Canto IV.</h4>

      <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

      <p>
        <span>“After the horrors of the stormy Night,<span class="linenum">1</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with gloom, and lightning-gleams, and hiss of wind,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">breaks lovely Morning’s pure and blessèd light,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with hope of haven and sure rest to find:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Sol banisheth the dark obscure from sight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">laying the terror of man’s timid mind:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Thus to the doughty kingdom it befel,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when King Fernando bade this world farewell.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“For, if so many with such hopes were firèd<span class="linenum">2</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for one whose potent arm their harms could pay</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on those, that wrought their wrongs with soul untirèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nerved by Fernando’s heedless, feeble way;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in shortest time it happed as they desirèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when ever-glorious John arose to sway,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the only heir that did from Pedro spring,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and (though a bastard) every inch a King.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“That such accession came from Heaven divine<span class="linenum">3</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_140">[Pg. 140]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">proved ’special marvels, God His truth proclaiming,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when Ev’ora city saw the choicest sign,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a babe of age unspeech’d the ruler naming;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and, but to show the Heav’en’s supreme design,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">she raised her cradled limbs and voice, exclaiming,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>‘Portugal! Port’ugal!’ high uplifting hand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>‘for the new king, Dom John, who rules the land.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Changèd in sprite were all within the Reign,<span class="linenum">4</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">old hatreds firing hearts with novel flame;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">absolute cruelties none cared restrain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">popular Fury dealt to whence it came:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Soon are the friends and kith and kinsmen slain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of the adult’erous County and the Dame,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with whom incont’inent love and lust unblest,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the wappen’d widow showèd manifest.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But he, dishonour’d and with cause, at last<span class="linenum">5</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by cold white weapon falls before her eyes,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and with him many to destruction past;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for flame so kindled all consuming flies:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">This, like Astyanax, is headlong cast</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from the tall steeple (’spite his dignities);</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whom orders, altar, honours, nought avail;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>those through the highways torn and stript they trail.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Now long Oblivion veils the deeds accurst<span class="linenum">6</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_141">[Pg. 141]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of mortal fierceness, such as Rome beheld,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">done by fierce Marius, or the bloody thirst</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Sylla, when parforce his foe expel’d.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thus Léonor, who mortal vengeance nurst</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for her dead County gars, with fury swell’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Castilia’s force on Lusitania fall,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>calling her daughter heir of Portugal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Beatrice was the daughter, interwed<span class="linenum">7</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with the Castilian, who for kingship greedeth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">putative offspring of Fernando’s bed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">if evil Fame so much to her concedeth.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hearing the voice, Castile high raiseth head,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and saith this daughter to her sire succeedeth;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for warfare must’ereth she her warrior bands</span>
        <br/>
        <span>from various regions and from various lands.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“They flock from all the Province, by one Brigo<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-84" id="noteref-84">[84]</a><span class="linenum">8</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(if such man ever was) yclept of yore;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and lands by Ferd’inand won, and Cid Rodrigo</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from the tyrannick gov’ernance of the Moor.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Little in fear of warlike feat doth he go</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who with hard plowshare cleaving lordeth o’er</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the champaign Leonèze, and boasts to be</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the blight and bane of Moorish chivalry.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“In Valour’s ancient fame the Vandal host,<span class="linenum">9</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_142">[Pg. 142]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">confident still and stubborn, ’gan appear</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from all Andalusía’s head and boast,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">laved by thy chrystal wave, Guadalquivir!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the noble Island<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-85" id="noteref-85">[85]</a>
          eke, whilere the post</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Tyrian strangers, to the war drew near,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>bringing insignia by renown well known,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Hercules’ Pillars on their pennons shown.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Eke come they trooping from Toledo’s reign,<span class="linenum">10</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">City of noble, ancient or’igin, span’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by Tagus circling with his sweet glad vein,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that bursts and pours from Conca’s<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-86" id="noteref-86">[86]</a> mountain-land.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">You also, you, all craven fear disdain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sordid Gallegos! hard and canny band,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for stern resistance fast to arms ye flew,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>warding their doughty blows whose weight ye knew.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Eke War’s black Furies hurried to the fight<span class="linenum">11</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the fierce Biscayan folk, who clean despise</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">all polisht reasons, and ne wrong ne slight</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of stranger races bear in patient guise.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Asturias-land and that Guipusc’oan hight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">proud of the mine which iron ore supplies,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with it their haughty sworders armed and made</span>
        <br/>
        <span>ready their rightful lords i’ the war to aid.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“John in whose bosom Peril only grows<span class="linenum">12</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_143">[Pg. 143]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the strength Jew Sampson borrow’d of his hair,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">though all he hath be few to fight his foes,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yet bids his few for battle-gage prepare:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And, not that counsel fails when danger shows,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with his chief lords he counsels on th’ affair,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>but drift of inner thoughts he seeks and finds;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for ’mid the many there be many minds.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Nor lack their reas’onings who would disconcert<span class="linenum">13</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">opinions firmly fixt in pop’ular will,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose weal of ancient valour is convèrt</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to an unusèd and disloyal ill:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Men in whose hearts Fear, gelid and inert,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">reigneth, which faith and truth were wont to fill:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Deny they King and Country; and, if tried,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>they had (as Peter did) their God denied.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But ne’er did such denial-sin appear<span class="linenum">14</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in noble Nuno Alv’ares, nay, instead,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">although his brothers show’d default so clear,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he fiercely chid the fickle hearts misled;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and to the lieges steeped in doubt and fear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with phrase more forceful than fine-drawn he said,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>too fere for facund, as he bared his glave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>threating Earth, seas, and sphere with ban and brave:—</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘What! ’mid the noble sons of Portugale<span class="linenum">15</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_144">[Pg. 144]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that nills to strike for freedom beats a heart?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">What! in this province which the nations all</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">crowned War’s princess in ev’ery earthly part</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">breathes, who his aid denies, such nid’ering thrall?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">renaying faith and love, and force and art</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of Portingall; and, be whate’er the cause,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>would see his country keep the stranger’s laws?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘What! flows not still within your veins the blood<span class="linenum">16</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of the brave soldiers who ’neath banners borne</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by great Henriques<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-87" id="noteref-87">[87]</a> fierce with hero-mood,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">this valiant race in war did ever scorn?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">When tane so many banners, and withstood</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so many foemen, who such losses mourn,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that seven noble Yarls were forced to yield</span>
        <br/>
        <span>their swords besides the spoils that strewed the field?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Say you, by whom were alway trodden down<span class="linenum">17</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">these, now who seem to tread adown on you;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for Diniz and his son of high renown,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">save by your sires’ and grandsires’ derring-do?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Then if by sin or sore neglect o’erthrown</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so could your olden force Fernand undo,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to you fresh forces this new King shall bring;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>an it be sooth that Subjects change with King.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘Such King ye have, that an ye courage have<span class="linenum">18</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_145">[Pg. 145]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">equal his kingly heart ye raised to reign,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">all en’emies shall ye rout so be ye brave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">much more the routed, eath to rout again:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But an such noble thought no more may save</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">your souls from pen’etrant Fear to bosom tane,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the craven hands of seely terrors tie,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>this stranger’s yoke I, only I, defy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘I with my vassals only, and my brand<span class="linenum">19</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(this said, his dreadful blade he bared mid-way)</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">against the high and hostile force will stand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that threats a kingdom strange to stranger sway:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">By virtue of my Liege, my mourning Land,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Loyalty denied by you this day</span>
        <br/>
        <span>I’ll conquer all, not only these my foes,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>but whatsoever durst my King oppose.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“E’en as the Youths who ’scaping Cannæ-field,—<span class="linenum">20</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">its only remnants,—to Canusium fled</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">despairing, and well-nigh disposed to yield,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and hail the Carthaginian vict’ory-led,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the young Cornelius to their faith appeal’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and took his comrades’ oath upon his blade</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Roman arms t’ uphold as long as life</span>
        <br/>
        <span>hold, or hath pow’er to ’scape the mortal strife:</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Forceth the Folk enforcèd in such wise<span class="linenum">21</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_146">[Pg. 146]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Nuno, and when his final words they hear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">th’ ice-cold and sullen humour sudden flies,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that curdled spirits with a coward fear:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">To mount the beast Neptunian all arise,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">charging and tossing high the lance and spear;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>they run and shout with open-mouthèd glee,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>‘Long live the famous King who sets us free!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“O’ the pop’ular classes not a few approve<span class="linenum">22</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the War their natal land and home sustains:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">These fare to furbish armours, and remove</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">injurious rust, of Peace the biting stains;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">they quilt their morions, plates for breast they prove;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">each arms himself e’en as his fancy fain ’s;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>while those on coats with thousand colours bright,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the signs and symbols of their loves indite.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“With all this lustrous Company enrol’d<span class="linenum">23</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from fresh Abrantès sallies John the Brave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Abrantès, fed by many a fountain cold</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Tagus rolling sweet abundant wave.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The vanguard-knights commands that warrior bold</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by Nature fittest made command to have</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of th’ Oriental hordes withouten count,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>wherewith Sir Xerxes crost the Hellespont:</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“I say Don Nuno, who appearèd here<span class="linenum">24</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_147">[Pg. 147]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the proudest scourger of that prideful Spain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as was in olden days the Hun so fere,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">curse of the Frankish, of Italian men.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Followed another far-famed cavalier</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who led the dexter phalanx Lusitane,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>apt to dispose them, prompt to lead his fellows,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Mem Rodrigues they call de Vasconcéllos.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“While of the Knights in corresponding flank<span class="linenum">25</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Antám Vasqués d’Almáda hath command,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to Avranches’ Earldom rose anon his rank,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who holds the Lusian host’s sinistral hand.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Nor far the banner from men’s notice shrank</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in rear, where Cinques by Castles<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-88" id="noteref-88">[88]</a> bordered stand</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with John the King, who shows a front so dread</span>
        <br/>
        <span>E’en Mars must learn to hide his ’minished head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Linèd the rempart<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-89" id="noteref-89">[89]</a> groups
          of trembling fair,<span class="linenum">26</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whom hopes and fears alternate heat and freeze,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">mothers and sisters, wives and brides in pray’er,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with fasts and pilgrim-vows the Heav’ens to please.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And now the Squadrons wont the war to dare,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">affront the serrièd hosts of enemies,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>who meet this onset with a mighty shout;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>while all are whelmed in dreadful direful doubt.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Messenger-trumpets to the cries reply,<span class="linenum">27</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_148">[Pg. 148]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and sibilant fife, and drum, and atambor;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while Antients wave their flags, and banners fly</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with many-colour’d legends ’broidered o’er.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’Twas fruity August when the days be dry,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and Ceres heaps the peasant’s threshing-floor,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>August, when Sol Astræa’s mansion reigneth;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-90" id="noteref-90">[90]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span>and the sweet must of grapes Lyæus straineth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Sudden Castilia’s trump the signal gave<span class="linenum">28</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">horribly fearful, sounding tem’erous dread:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Heard it the Hill Artábrus;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-91" id="noteref-91">[91]</a> and his wave</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Guadiana rollèd backwards as he fled:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">O’er Douro and Transtagan lands it drave;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Tagus sore agitated seaward sped;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>while mothers trembling at the terr’ible storm</span>
        <br/>
        <span>embraced with tighter arm each tiny form.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“How many faces there wan waxt and white,<span class="linenum">29</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose fainting hearts the friendly life-blood cheerèd!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">For in dire danger Fear hath more of might,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the fear of danger,—than the danger fearèd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">If not, it seemeth so; when rage of fight</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">man’s sprite to quell or kill the foe hath stirrèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>it makes him all unheed how high the cost</span>
        <br/>
        <span>were loss of limb, or dear life rashly lost.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Battle’s uncertain work begins; and move<span class="linenum">30</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_149">[Pg. 149]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">right wings on either part to take the plain;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">these fighting to defend the land they love,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">those eggèd on by hope that land to gain:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Soon great Pereira, who would foremost prove</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the knightly valour of his noble strain;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>charges and shocks, and strews the field till sown</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with those who covet what is not their own.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Now in the dust-blurred air with strident sound<span class="linenum">31</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">bolts, arrows, darts and man’ifold missiles fly;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">beneath the destrier’s horny hoof the ground</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">quaketh in terror, and the dales reply;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">shiver the lances; thundereth around</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the frequent crash of fellèd armoury;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>foes on the little force redoubling fall</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of Nuno fierce, who makes great numbers small.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“See! there his brethren meet him in the fray:<span class="linenum">32</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(Fierce chance and cruel case!) But dreads he nought;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">right little were it brother-foe to slay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who against King and Country trait’orous fought:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Amid these ren’egades not a few that day</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">war in the foremost squadrons fury-fraught</span>
        <br/>
        <span>against their brethren and their kin (sad Fate!)</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as in great Julius’ warfare with the Great.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-92" id="noteref-92">[92]</a></span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“O thou, Sertorius! O great Coriolane!<span class="linenum">33</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_150">[Pg. 150]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Catiline! all ye hosts of bygone age,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who ’gainst your Fatherland with hearts profane</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ragèd with rav’ening parricidal rage;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">if where Sumánus holds his dismal reign</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">most dreadful torments must your sin assuage,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>tell him, that e’en our Portugal sometimes</span>
        <br/>
        <span>suckled some traitors guilty of your crimes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Here doth the foremost of our lines give way,<span class="linenum">34</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so many foemen have its force opprest:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">There standeth Nuno, brave as Ly’on at bay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where Africk Ceita rears her hilly crest;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who sees the ’circling troop of cavalry,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">over the Tetu’an plain to chace addrest;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and raging as they couch the deadly spear</span>
        <br/>
        <span>seems somewhat stirred, but hides all craven fear:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“With sidelong glance he sights them, but his spleen<span class="linenum">35</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ferine forbids the King of Beasts to show</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a craven back; nay, rather on the screen</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of plumping lances leaps he as they grow.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">So stands our Knight, who stains and soils the green</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with alien gore-streams: On that field lie low</span>
        <br/>
        <span>some of his own; howe’er with valour dowerèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span>hearts lose their virtue by such odds o’erpowerèd.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“John felt the danger and the dure affront<span class="linenum">36</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_151">[Pg. 151]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Nuno; straight like Captain wise and ware,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he rushed afield, viewed all, and in the brunt</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with words and works taught men fresh deeds to dare.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">As nursing Ly’oness, fere and fierce of front,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who, left for chase her whelps secure in lair,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>findeth while for’aging for their wonted food</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Massylian<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-93" id="noteref-93">[93]</a> hind hath dared
          to rob her brood:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Runs, frantick raging, while her roar and moan<span class="linenum">37</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">make the Seven-Brother Mountains<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-94" id="noteref-94">[94]</a> shake and rave.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">So John with other chosen troop hath flown</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">foeward his dexter wing t’ enforce and save:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘Oh strong Companions! Souls of high renown!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Cavaliers braver than what men hold brave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>strike for your country! now all earthly chance,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>all hope of Liberty is on your lance!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Behold me here, your Comrade and your King,<span class="linenum">38</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who ’mid the spear and harness, bolt and bow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">foremost I charge and first myself I fling;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">smite, ye true Portughuese, deal yet one blow!’</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thus spake that great-soul’d Warrior, brandishing</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">four times his lance before the final throw;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and, thrusting forceful, by that single thrust</span>
        <br/>
        <span>lanceth such wounds that many bite the dust.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“For, see, his soldiers brent with ardour new,<span class="linenum">39</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_152">[Pg. 152]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">honoured repentance, honourable fire,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who shall display most courage staid and true,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and dare the dangers dealt by Mars his ire</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">contend: The steel that catcheth flamey hue,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">aims first at plate, then at the breast aims higher;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>thus, wounds they give and wounds they take again;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and, dealing Death, in Death they feel no pain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Many are sent to sight the Stygian wave,<span class="linenum">40</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">into whose bodies entered iron Death:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Here dieth Sanct’ Iágo’s Master brave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who fought with fiercest sprite till latest breath;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">another Master dire of Calatrave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">horrid in cruel havock, perisheth:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Eke the Pereiras foully renegate</span>
        <br/>
        <span>die God denying and denouncing Fate.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Of the vile, nameless Vulgar many bleed;<span class="linenum">41</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">flitting with Gentles to the Gulf profound;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where hungers, rav’ening with eternal greed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for passing human Shades the three-head Hound:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And humbling more that haughty, arr’ogant breed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and better taming enemies furibund,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Castilia’s Gonfanon sublime must fall</span>
        <br/>
        <span>beneath the forceful foot of Portugall.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span class="pagenum" id="Page_153">[Pg 153]</span> <br/>
        <span>“Here<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-95" id="noteref-95">[95]</a>
          wildest Battle hath its cruel’est will,<span class="linenum">42</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with deaths and shouts, and slash and gory shower;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the multitud’inous Braves, who’re killed and kill,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">rob of their proper hues the bloom and flower:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">At length they fly! they die! now waxeth still</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">War’s note, while lance and spear have lost their power:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Castilia’s King the fate of pride must own,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>seeing his purpose changed, his host o’erthrown.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“The field he leaveth to the Conqueror,<span class="linenum">43</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">too glad his life had not been left in fight:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Follow him all who can; and panick sore</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lends them not feet, but feather’d wings for flight:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Their breasts are fillèd with a wild doloùr,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for Deaths, for Treasure waste in wanton plight;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for woe, disgust, and foul dishonour’s soil</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to see the Victor rev’elling in their spoil.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Some fly with furious curses, and blaspheme<span class="linenum">44</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">him who the World with Warfare made accurst;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">others that cov’etous breast all culp’able deem</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for Greed enquicken’d by his selfish thirst.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">That, alien wealth to win, with sore extreme</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he plunged his hapless folk in woes the worst;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>leaving so many wives and mothers, lorn</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of sons and spouses, evermore to mourn.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Campèd our conqu’ering John the ’customed days<span class="linenum">45</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_154">[Pg. 154]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on foughten field, in glory of the brave;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">then with vowed pilgrimage, gift, pray’er, and praise,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he gave Him graces who such vict’ory gave.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But Nuno, willing not by peaceful ways</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on human memory his name to ’grave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>but by his sovran feats of war, commands</span>
        <br/>
        <span>his men pass over to Transtágan lands.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“His gallant project favoureth Destiny,<span class="linenum">46</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">making effect commensurate with cause;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Lands that bordered by the Vandals lie</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yielding their treasures bow before his laws:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now Bætic banners which Seville o’erfly,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and flags of various princes, without pause,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>all trail foot-trampled; naught their force availeth</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whate’er the forceful Portingall assaileth.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-96" id="noteref-96">[96]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“By these and other Victories opprest,<span class="linenum">47</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Castilia’s lieges long deplored their woes;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when Peace by all desired and gentle Rest,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to grant their vanquisht fone the Victors chose;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">then seemed it good to His almighty hest</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that the contending Sovrans should espouse</span>
        <br/>
        <span>two royal Damsels born of English race,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Princesses famed for honour, form, and grace.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Nills the brave bosom, used to bloody broil,<span class="linenum">48</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_155">[Pg. 155]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the lack of foeman who his force shall dree;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and thus, Earth holding none to slay and spoil,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he carries conquest o’er the unconquer’d Sea.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">First of our Kings is he who left the soil</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">patrial, teaching Africk’s Paynimry,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by dint of arms, how much in word and deed</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Laws of <span class="smcap">Christ</span> Mafamed’s laws
          exceed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“See! thousand swimming Birds the silv’ery plain<span class="linenum">49</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Thetis cleave, and spurn her fume and fret,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with bellied wings to seize the wind they strain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where his extremest mete Alcides set:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Mount Abyla, and dight with tow’er and fane</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Ceita, they seize, ignoble Mahomet</span>
        <br/>
        <span>they oust: and thus our gen’eral Spain secure</span>
        <br/>
        <span>from Julian-craft,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-97" id="noteref-97">[97]</a> disloyal
          and impure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Death granted not to Portugal’s desire<span class="linenum">50</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hero so happy long should wear the crown;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but soon th’ angelick Host and heav’enly Choir</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a home in highest Heaven made his own:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">To ward his Lusia, and to raise her higher,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">He who withdrew him left the goodly boon,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>building our country on her broadest base,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of noble Infants a right royal Race.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Noways so happy was Duarte’s fate,<span class="linenum">51</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_156">[Pg. 156]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">what while he rose the royal rank to fill:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thus troublous Time doth ever alternate</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">pleasure with pain, and temper good with ill.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">What man hath lived through life in joyous state,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who firmness finds in Fortune’s fickle will?</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Yet to this Kingdom and this King she deignèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span>spare the vicissitudes her laws ordainèd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Captive he saw his brother, hight Fernand,<span class="linenum">52</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Saint aspiring high with purpose brave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who as a hostage in the Sara’cen’s hand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">betrayed himself his ’leaguer’d host to save.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">He lived for purest faith to Fatherland</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the life of noble Ladye sold a slave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>lest bought with price of Ceita’s potent town</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to publick welfare be preferred his own.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Codrus, lest foemen conquer, freely chose<span class="linenum">53</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to yield his life and, conqu’ering self, to die;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Regulus, lest his land in aught should lose,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lost for all time all hopes of liberty;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">this, that Hispania might in peace repose,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">chose lifelong thrall, eterne captivity:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Codrus nor Curtius with man’s awe for meed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>nor loyal Decii ever dared such deed.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Afonso, now his kingdom’s only heir,—<span class="linenum">54</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_157">[Pg. 157]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a name of Vict’ory on our Spanish strand,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who, the haught fierceness of the Moor’s frontier</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to lowest mis’ery tamed with mighty hand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">pardie, had been a peerless cavalier</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">had he not lusted after Ebro-land:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>But still shall Africk say, ’twere hopeless feat</span>
        <br/>
        <span>on battle-plain such terr’ible King to beat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“This could pluck Golden Apples from the bough,<span class="linenum">55</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which only he in Tiryns born could pluck:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">He yoked the salvage Moor, and even now</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the salvage Moorman’s neck must bear his yoke.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Still palms and greeny bays begird his brow</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">won from the barb’arous raging hosts that flock,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Alcacèr’s fortèd town with arms to guard,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Tangier the pop’ulous, and Arzille the hard.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“All these by gallant deeds, in fine, were gainèd,<span class="linenum">56</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and low lay ev’ery diamantine wall</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">anent the Portingalls, now taught and trainèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to throw the Pow’er that lists to try a fall:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Such extreme marvels by strong arms attainèd,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">right worthy el’oquent scripture one and all,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the gallant Cavaliers, whose Gestes of glory</span>
        <br/>
        <span>added a lustre to our Lusian story.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“But soon, ambition-madded, goaded on<span class="linenum">57</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_158">[Pg. 158]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by Passion of Dominion bitter-sweet,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he falls on Ferdinand of Aragon,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-98" id="noteref-98">[98]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Castile’s haught kingdom hoping to defeat.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The swarming hostile crowds their armour don,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the proud and various races troop and meet,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>from Cadiz fast to tow’ering Pyrenee,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>who bow to Ferdinand the neck and knee.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Scornèd an idler in the realm to rest<span class="linenum">58</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the youthful John; who taketh early heed</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to aid his greedy father with his best,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and sooth, came th’ aidance at the hour of need.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Issued from bloody battle’s terr’ible test</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with brow unmoved, serene in word and deed</span>
        <br/>
        <span>maugre defeat, the Sire, that man of blood,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>while ’twixt the rivals Vict’ory doubtful stood:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“For-that of valiant princely vein his son,<span class="linenum">59</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a gentle, stalwart, right magnan’imous Knight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when to th’ opponents he such harm had done,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">one whole day campèd on the field of fight.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thus from Octavian<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-99" id="noteref-99">[99]</a> was the vict’ory won,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while Anthony, his mate, was Victor hight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when they the murth’erers who the Cæsar slew,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>upon Philippi-field the deed made rue.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“But as thro’ gathered shades of Night eterne<span class="linenum">60</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_159">[Pg. 159]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Afonso sped to realms of endless joy,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Prince who rose to rule our realm in turn</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">was John the Second and the thirteenth Roy.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">This, never-dying Glory’s meed to earn,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">higher than ventured mortal man to fly,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>ventured; who sought those bounds of ruddy Morn,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which I go seeking, this my voyage-bourne.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Envoys commiss’ioneth he, who passing o’er<span class="linenum">61</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hispania, Gaul, and honoured Italy,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">took ship in haven of th’ illustrious shore</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where erst inhumèd lay Parthenopè;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Naples, whose Dest’iny was decreed of yore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the var’ious stranger’s slave and thrall to be,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and rise in honour when her years are full</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by sovereign Hispania’s noble rule.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“They cleave the bright blue waves of Sic’ulan deeps;<span class="linenum">62</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by sandy marge of Rhodos-isle they go;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and thence debark they where the cliffy steeps</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">are still enfam’d for Magnus here lain low:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-100" id="noteref-100">[100]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">To Memphis wend they, and the land that reaps</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">crops which fat Nylus’ flood doth overflow;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and climb ’yond Egypt to those Æthiop heights</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where men conserve <span class="smcap">Christ’s</span> high and holy
          rites.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“And eke they pass the waters Erythréan,<span class="linenum">63</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_160">[Pg. 160]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where past the shipless peoples Israelite;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">remain arear the ranges Nabathéan,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which by the name of Ishmael’s seed are hight:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Those odoriferous incense-coasts Sabæan,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">dainty Adonis’ Mother’s dear delight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>they round, and all of Happy Ar’aby known,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>leaving the Waste of Sand and Reign of Stone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“They push where still preserveth Persic Strait,<span class="linenum">64</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">confusèd Babel’s darkling memory;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">there, where the Tygre blendeth with Euphràte,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which from their head-streams hold their heads so high.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thence fare they his pure stream to find, whose fate</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’twill be to deal such length of history,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Indus, and cross that breadth of Ocean-bed</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where daring Trajan never darèd tread.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Strange tribes they saw, and through wild peoples past<span class="linenum">65</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Gedrosian, and Carmanian, and of Inde;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">seeing the various custom, various caste,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which ev’ery Region beareth in her kind.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But from such asp’erous ways, such voyage vast</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">man finds not facile safe return to find:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>In fine, there died they and to natal shore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to home, sweet home, returned they nevermore.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-101" id="noteref-101">[101]</a></span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Reserved, meseemeth, Heav’en’s clear-sighting will<span class="linenum">66</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_161">[Pg. 161]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for Man’oel, worthy of such goodly meed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">this arduous task, and stirred him onward still</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to stirring action and illustrious deed:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Man’oel, who rose the throne of John to fill,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and to his high resolves did eke succeed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>forthwith when taken of his realm the charge,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>took up the conquest of the Ocean large:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“The same, as one obliged by a noble Thought,<span class="linenum">67</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the debt of Honour left as ’heritance</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by predecessors, (who in life aye fought</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">their own dear land’s best interests to advance)</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ne’er for a moment failèd of his fraught,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Obligement;—at what hour Day’s radiance</span>
        <br/>
        <span>pales, and the nitid Stars on high that rise,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with falling courses woo man’s sleep-worn eyes;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Already being on bed of gold recline’d<span class="linenum">68</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where Fancy worketh with prophetick strain;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">revolving matters in his restless mind,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the bounden duties of his race and reign;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Sleep, soft restorer, comes his eyne to bind,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while thought and mem’ory both unbound remain;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for, as his weary lids sweet slumber sealeth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Morpheus in varied forms himself revealeth.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Here seems the King so high to soar away,<span class="linenum">69</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_162">[Pg. 162]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that touched his head the nearest primal Sphere,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-102" id="noteref-102">[102]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where worlds of vision ’neath his glances lay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nations of vasty numbers, strange and fere:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and there right near the birthplace of the Day,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">unto his outstretched eyne began appear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>from distant, olden, cloud-compelling mountains</span>
        <br/>
        <span>flowing, a twain of high, deep, limpid fountains.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Birds of the feral kind, and kine, and flocks,<span class="linenum">70</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’bode in the shadows of the shaggy wood:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">A thousand herbs and trees with gnarled stocks,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">barring the paths of passing mortals stood.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Adverse had ever been those mountain-rocks</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to human intercourse, and clearly show’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>never since Adam sinned against our days,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>brake foot of man this breadth of bosky maze.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“From out the Fountains seemed he to behold<span class="linenum">71</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for him inclining, with long hasty stride,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">two Men, who showèd old and very old,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of aspect rustick yet with lordly pride:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Adown their twistèd pointed locks slow roll’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">gouts which their bodies bathed on ev’ery side;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the skin of earthy texture, dark and dull;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the beard hirsute, unshorn, but long and full.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“These hoary Fathers round their foreheads bore<span class="linenum">72</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_163">[Pg. 163]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">tree-boughs, with unknown shrub and herb entwine’d;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and one a worn and wearied aspect wore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as though from regions lying far behind:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And thus his waters which did slower pour</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">seemèd adown the further side to wind:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>E’en thus Alpheus from Arcádia fled</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to Syracuse and Arethusa’s bed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“This, who with graver gait and gesture came,<span class="linenum">73</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">thus from a distance to the Monarch crieth:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘O thou! whose sceptre and whose crown shall claim,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Earth a mighty part that guarded lieth;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">we twain, who fly through mouths of men by Fame,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">we, whose untamèd neck man’s yoke defieth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>warn thee, O King! ’tis time to send commands,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and raise large tribute from our natal lands.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Illustrious Gange am I, whose farthest fount<span class="linenum">74</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in realms celestial, heav’enly heights, I trace:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And yon stands Indus, King, who on the mount</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which thou regardest, hath of birth his place.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thou shalt hard warfare wage on our account;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but, still insisting ev’ery fear to face,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with ne’er seen conquests, and sans soil or stain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the tribes thou viewest thou shalt curb and rein.’</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“No more that holy noble River said;<span class="linenum">75</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_164">[Pg. 164]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">both in a moment fade and disappear:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Awaketh Manoel in novel dread,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and big o’erchargèd thoughts ybred of fear.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Meanwhile his glitt’ering mantle Phœbus spread</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">upon the sombre somn’olent hemisphere;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Dawn comes and o’er the gloomy welkin showers</span>
        <br/>
        <span>blushings of modest rose, and fiery flowers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“The King in counsel calls his lords to meet,<span class="linenum">76</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and of the vision’d figures news imparts;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the holy Elder’s words he doth repeat,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which with a mighty marvel heaves their hearts.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">All straight resolve t’ equip a sturdy fleet,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that men, well skilled in navigator-arts,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>should cut the stubborn Main and forth should fare</span>
        <br/>
        <span>in search of novel climes and novel air.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“I, who right little deemed, forsooth, to find<span class="linenum">77</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">myself attaining hopes my Sprite desirèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yet mighty matters of such cunning kind</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">my heart presaging promised and inspirèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">e’en now ken not, or how or why design’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">or for what happy chance in me admirèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that famous Monarch chose me, gave to me</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of this grave, gracious enterprize the key.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“And with fair offer coucht in courteous phrase,—<span class="linenum">78</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_165">[Pg. 165]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lordly command obliging more than laws,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he said: ‘In exploits dure and daring ways</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who woo most perils win the most applause:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Riskt life enfameth man with highest praise</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">or lost in <span class="allsmcap">HONOUR’S</span>, not in honours’,
          cause;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>And, when to blighting Fear it never bends,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>short it may be, yet more its length extends.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Thee from a chosen host have chosen I<span class="linenum">79</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the dangers claimed by thee to undergo:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’Tis heavy travail, hard, heroick, high;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which love of me shall lighten, well I trow.’</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">I could not suffer more:—‘Great King!’ I cry,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘to face the steel-clad host, sword, lance, fire, snow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for thee were thing so slight, my sole annoy</span>
        <br/>
        <span>is to see trivial life so vain a toy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Imagine ev’ery wildest aventure,<span class="linenum">80</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">such as Eurystheus for Alcídes plan’d:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Cleone’s Lyon, Harpies foul and dour,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and Boar of Erymanth and Hydra ban’d;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in fine to seek those empty shades obscure</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where Styx surrounds of Dis the dire Dead-land;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the greatest danger and the deadliest brunt,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for thee, O King! this soul, this flesh would front.’</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“His thanks and costly gifts on me bestows<span class="linenum">81</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_166">[Pg. 166]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the King, whose reason lauds my ready will;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for Valour fed on praises lives and grows,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Praise is the noble Spirit’s spur and spell.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">At once to share my fortunes doth propose,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whom friendship and fraternal love compel,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>nor less resolved to win him name and fame, a</span>
        <br/>
        <span>dear trusty brother namèd Paul da Gama.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Eke Nicholas Coelho volunteers,<span class="linenum">82</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">trainèd to toilsome tasks and sufferings long;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">both are in valour and in counsel peers,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in arms experienced, and in battle strong.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now choicest hands in Youthtide’s gen’erous years,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lusting for Bravery’s meed around me throng;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>doughty, high-mettled, as doth best become</span>
        <br/>
        <span>advent’urous manhood that would tempt such doom.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“All these by Man’oel’s hand remun’erate were,<span class="linenum">83</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that Love through Duty might the more increase;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and with high words each heart was fired to bear</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">adventures, peradventure, sans surcease.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thus did the Minyæ for their feat prepare,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to gain the glories of the Golden Fleece,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>orac’ulous Argo-ship, that dared the first</span>
        <br/>
        <span>through Euxine waves her vent’urous way to burst.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Now in famed Ulysséa’s haven man’d,<span class="linenum">84</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_167">[Pg. 167]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with raptures worthy of the great design</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(where his sweet liquor and his snowy sand</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our Tagus blendeth with Neptunian brine),</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ride the ships ready. Here my strong young band</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by fear unbridled glad in labour join;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for those of Mars and Neptune,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-103" id="noteref-103">[103]</a> one and all,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the world would wander did I only call.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Fast by the foreshore comes the soldiery<span class="linenum">85</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in various colours prankt with various art;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor less enforced by inner force are they</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to seek and see Earth’s unexplorèd part.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Round the good Navy gentle breezes play</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and blithely waves each airy estandart:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>They<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-104" id="noteref-104">[104]</a> swear, far-gazing
          on the breadth of brine,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>’mid stars Olympick Argo-like to shine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“When all prepared according to this sort<span class="linenum">86</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with what of wants such lengthy way demandeth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our souls we did prepare for Death’s disport</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who before seaman’s eyne for ever standeth:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">To the Most Highest, throned in Heaven’s court</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which He sustains, whose glance this globe commandeth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that He, our guard and guide, His aidance lend,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>we prayed, and see our incept to its end.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span class="pagenum" id="Page_168">[Pg 168]</span> <br/>
        <span>“Thus we departed from the saintly Shrine<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-105" id="noteref-105">[105]</a><span class="linenum">87</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">built on the margent of the briny wave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">named, for all mem’ory, from the Land Divine,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where God incarnèd came the world to save.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">King! I assure thee when this mind of mine</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">rememb’ereth how ’twas ours those shores to leave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>filled are my sprite and heart with doubts and fears,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and eyes can hardly stay their trickling tears.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“The City-people on that saddest day<span class="linenum">88</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(these for their bosom-friends, and those for kin,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and others but spectators) thronged the way</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sad and down-hearted at the dreary scene:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">We, winding through the virtuous array</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a thousand monks and priests of rev’erend mien,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>praying, in solemn pageant, to the Lord,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>afoot set forth the ready barques to board.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“On such long dubious courses sent to steer,<span class="linenum">89</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">us deemed the people den’izens of the tomb;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the wailing women shed the piteous tear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and sadly sighed the men to sight our doom:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Wives, sisters, mothers (most their hearts must fear</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose love is foremost) added to the gloom</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Despair; and shudder’d with a freezing fright</span>
        <br/>
        <span>lest we, their loved ones, aye be lost to sight.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“This, following, saith: ‘O son! I ever held<span class="linenum">90</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_169">[Pg. 169]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">coolth of my sorrows and the sweet relief</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of mine already weary way-worn eld</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so soon to sink in glooms of need and grief;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">why leave me thus to want and woe compel’d?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Why fly my love, fond child? whose days so brief</span>
        <br/>
        <span>shall set in darkness, and in briny grave</span>
        <br/>
        <span>shalt feed the fishes of the greedy wave.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“That, with loosed locks: ‘O douce and dearest spouse,<span class="linenum">91</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lacking whose love Love willeth not I live;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">why risk, when daring Ocean’s wrath to rouse,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">thy life, my life which is not thine to give?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">How canst forget our fond fair marriage-vows?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Why face the waves a homeless fugitive?</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Our love, our vain content shall nought avail</span>
        <br/>
        <span>thrown to the breezes as they blow the sail?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“With such and sim’ilar words that spake the tongue<span class="linenum">92</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of love and human nature’s yearning woe,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">followed our seaward path both old and young,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">life’s two extremes by Time made weak and slow.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Sad Echo wailèd the near wolds among,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as though hard hills were movèd grief to show;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>And tears the snowy shore suchwise bedew’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>drops rivall’d sands in equal multitude.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Of us the Company, ne’er raising eye<span class="linenum">93</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_170">[Pg. 170]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on wife or mother, marcht in such a state,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">we feared our hearts fall faint, and fain we fly</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our fixt resolves, repenting all too late:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thus I determined straight aboard to hie,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sans ‘Fare-thee-wells’ by custom consecrate;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which, though they be dear love’s own lovely way,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>redouble grief to those who go or stay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But now an agèd Sire of reverend mien,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-106" id="noteref-106">[106]</a><span class="linenum">94</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">upon the foreshore throngèd by the crowd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with eyne fast fixt upon our forms was seen,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and discontented thrice his brow he bow’d:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">His deep-toned accents raising somewhat keen,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that we from shipboard hear him speak aloud,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with lore by long experience only grown,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>thus from his time-taught breast he made his moan:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Oh craving of Command! Oh vain Desire!<span class="linenum">95</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of vainest van’ity man miscalleth Fame!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Oh fraud’ulent gust, so easy fanned to fire</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by breath of vulgar, aping Honour’s name!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">What just and dreadful judgment deals thine ire,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to seely souls who overlove thy claim!</span>
        <br/>
        <span>What deaths, what direful risks, what agonies</span>
        <br/>
        <span>wherewith thou guerd’onest them, thy fitting prize!</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘Thou dour disturber of man’s sprite and life,<span class="linenum">96</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_171">[Pg. 171]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">fount of backsliding and adultery,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sagacious waster, and consummate thief</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of subjects, kingdoms, treasure, empery:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">They hail thee noble, and they hail thee chief,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">though digne of all indignities thou be;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>they call thee Fame and Glory sovereign,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>words, words, the heart of silly herd to gain!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘What new disaster dost thou here design?<span class="linenum">97</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">What horror for our realm and race invent?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">What unheard dangers or what deaths condign,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">veiled by some name that soundeth excellent?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">What bribe of gorgeous reign, and golden mine,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose ready offer is so rarely meant?</span>
        <br/>
        <span>What Fame hast promised them? what pride of story?</span>
        <br/>
        <span>What palms? what triumphs? what victorious glory?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘But oh! race ’gendered by his sin insane,<span class="linenum">98</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whom disobedience of the high command,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">not only chasèd from the heav’enly reign,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and doomed to distant and exilèd land;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but, eke, from other state too blest for men</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where Peace with Innocence fared hand in hand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that olden golden Age, his victims hurl’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span>into an iron and an armèd world:</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘Since by this gustful Van’ity led astray,<span class="linenum">99</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_172">[Pg. 172]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lighter thou makest man’s light phantasy;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">since his brute fierceness and his lust of prey</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">bear honoured names of Strength and Valiancy;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">since thou wilt price and prize, in wildest way,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">despisal of man’s life, which aye should be</span>
        <br/>
        <span>esteemed of mortals, nay, held doubly dear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when He who gave it, gave it up with fear:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Neighbours thee not the hateful Ishmaelite,<span class="linenum">100</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with whom abundant strife shalt ever hold?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Follows he not th’ Arabian’s law unright,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">an thou wouldst fight to fill of <span class="smcap">Christ</span> the
          fold?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">A thousand cities, regions infinite,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">are they not his, an cov’etest earth and gold?</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Is he not strong in warfare, high in name,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>if Honour be, not greed of gain, thine aim?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Dost leave the foeman breeding at thy gate<span class="linenum">101</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who wendest foreign far-off fone to seek;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whereby this antique realm lies desolate;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose strength, o’erstretchèd, waxeth ruinous weak?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Seekest thou dark and dubious chance of fate,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who hearest Fame with honey’d accents speak,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>lauding thy lot, and hailing thee seignior</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of Inde, Perse, Arab and Æthiopia-shore?</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘Oh, curst the Mortal, who the first was found<span class="linenum">102</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_173">[Pg. 173]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">teaching the tree to wear the flowing sheet!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">worthy th’ eternal pains of the Profound,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">if just that justest law I hold and greet.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Ne’er may man’s judgment lofty and renown’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor genius rare, nor harp sonorous sweet,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>requite such gift with mem’ory, honour, fame;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>perish thy glory, perish e’en thy name!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Iápetus’ daring Son from Heaven brought<span class="linenum">103</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the fire he added human breast to bless;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">fire, that inflamed to wars a world distraught,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with death and eke disgrace: (ah, sad distress!)</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">How better far for us and ours hadst wrought</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Prometheus! and with loss of life the less;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>had thy famed Statue never felt the fire</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of great designs that ’gender great desire!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Ne’er had the Stripling, miserably brave,<span class="linenum">104</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’tempted his Sire’s high car, nor empty Air</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the mighty Mason and his boy, who gave</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">names which the Sea-gulf and the River bear.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">No fierce emprize and fell, by land and wave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">through fire, steel, water, wind, frost, heat, to fare,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>wherein the human race loves not to range.</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Sorrowful sort! condition strangest strange!’</span>
      </p>
      </div></blockquote>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-iv-endnotes">

      <h4>Canto IV. Endnotes.</h4>

      <ol start="84">

      <li id="note-84"><p>Bryx or Brigus, whence Bragança. <a href="#noteref-84" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-85"><p>Isla de Leon = Gades, Cadiz. <a href="#noteref-85" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-86"><p>The Spanish Cuenca, concha, a shell. <a href="#noteref-86" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-87"><p>Afonso I., son of <abbr title="Dom">D.</abbr> Henrique (Canto iii., 35). <a href="#noteref-87" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-88"><p>The Castles were added in <span class="allsmcap"><abbr title="Anno Domini">A.D.</abbr></span> 1252. <a href="#noteref-88" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-89"><p>Of Abrantes town; battle of Aljubarrota, <span class="allsmcap"><abbr title="Anno Domini">A.D.</abbr></span> 1385. <a href="#noteref-89" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-90"><p>Sol in Libra. <a href="#noteref-90" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-91"><p>Cape Rocca-de-Cintra. <a href="#noteref-91" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-92"><p>Pompey, Canto III., 62. <a href="#noteref-92" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-93"><p>Numidian. <a href="#noteref-93" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-94"><p>Montes-Sete-Irmãos, near Tangier. <a href="#noteref-94" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-95"><p>Around the Royal banner. <a href="#noteref-95" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-96"><p>Battle of Valverde. <a href="#noteref-96" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-97"><p>Canto III., 101. <a href="#noteref-97" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-98"><p>“Saint” Ferdinand. <a href="#noteref-98" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-99"><p>Octavius. <a href="#noteref-99" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-100"><p>Pompey’s tomb on Mount Casius (Baalzephon). <a href="#noteref-100" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-101"><p>Explorers’ epitaph! <a href="#noteref-101" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-102"><p>That of the Moon. <a href="#noteref-102" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-103"><p>The soldiers and sailors then being different services. <a href="#noteref-103" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-104"><p><i>i.e.</i>, the ships. <a href="#noteref-104" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-105"><p>Old chapel of Belem (Bethlehem). <a href="#noteref-105" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-106"><p>The “Old Man of Belem” is the people personified. <a href="#noteref-106" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>
      </ol>
    </section>
  </section>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

  <section id="canto-v">
    <h3>Canto V.</h3>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-v-argument">

      <h4>Argument<br/>
        of the Fifth Canto.</h4>

      <p class="continued">Vasco da Gama pursueth the recital of his voyage, and describeth to the
        King of Melinde his departure from Lisbon; the divers lands whereat
        they touched, and the peoples whom they saw as far as the Cape of Good
        Hope: The chance of Fernam Velloso: The tale of the giant Adamastor:
        Continuation of the voyage to Melinde, where the discourse endeth;
        peace and true friendship being established between the Gama and that
        King.</p>

    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-v-another-argument">

      <h4>Another Argument.</h4>

      <blockquote class="poetry italics" lang="pt"><div>

      <p>
        <span>Relata o Gama illustre ao Rei potente</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Sua viagem longa, e incerta via,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>As estranhas nações de Africa ardente,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>E de Fernão Velloso a ousadia:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Como a Adamastor vio, Gigante ingente,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Que hum dos filhos da terra se dizia,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>E as cousas que passou até seu porto</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Onde repouso achou, e são conforto.</span>
      </p>
      </div></blockquote>

      <table class="table-poetry">
        <tbody>
          <tr>
            <td>The famèd Gama tells the forceful King</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="3">(1–30)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>His long-drawn voyage, and uncertain road;</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>What couthless nations in hot Africk spring,</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>And, eke, Fernam Velloso’s hardihood:</td>
            <td>(31–36)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>How Adamastor, Giant menacing</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(37–60)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>They saw, who claimed to be of Terra’s brood;</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>And other things that happened till was found</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(61–end)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Haven of rest, with comfort safe and sound.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-v-body">

      <h4>Canto V.</h4>

      <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

      <p>
        <span>“Such words that agèd Sire of honoured mien<span class="linenum">1</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">still was exclaiming, as we spread the wing</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to catch the sea-breath gentle and serene,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and from the well-known Port went sorrowing:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">After the manner of far-faring men,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when loosed the sail we garred the welkin ring</span>
        <br/>
        <span>crying ‘Boon Voyage!’ whereupon the breeze</span>
        <br/>
        <span>made every trunk glide off with ’customed ease.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“’Twas in the season when th’ Eternal Light<span class="linenum">2</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">entered the Beast that workt Nemæa’s woe;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-107" id="noteref-107">[107]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and rolled our Earth, consumed by Time’s long flight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in her sixth epoch, feeble, cold and slow:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now, in the wonted way, had met her sight</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the suns that fourteen hundred courses show,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with seven and ninety more, wherein she ran,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as o’er the seas th’ Armada’s course began.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Slow, ever slower, banisht from our eyne,<span class="linenum">3</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_180">[Pg. 180]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">vanisht our native hills astern remaining:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Remained dear Tagus, and the breezy line</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Cintran peaks, long, long, our gaze detaining:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Remainèd eke in that dear country mine</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our hearts with pangs of mem’ory ever paining:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Till, when all veilèd sank in darkling air,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>naught but the welkin and the wave was there.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Thus fared we opening those wastes of tide,<span class="linenum">4</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">no generation openèd before;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sighting new islands and new airs we hied,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which gen’erous Henry had the heart t’ explore:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Past Mauritanian hills and homes we plied,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the realm Antæus ruled in times of yore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>leaving to larboard; on our dexter hand</span>
        <br/>
        <span>lay nothing surer than suspected land.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-108" id="noteref-108">[108]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Hard by the great Madeiran Isle we past,<span class="linenum">5</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose wealth of woodland won her chryssome name;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where first our people did their fortunes cast,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for name more famous than for classick fame:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But not the least, although ’twas found the last,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the smiles of Venus shall this Island claim:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Nay, an ’twere hers, scant cause it had to fear a</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Cnidos or Cyprus, Paphos or Cythéra.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“We left Massylia’s seaboard, sterile waste,<span class="linenum">6</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_181">[Pg. 181]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where Azenéguan<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-109" id="noteref-109">[109]</a> herds their cattle feed;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a folk that never soft sweet waters taste,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor doth the meadow-math suffice their need;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a land no luscious fruit’ery ever graced,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where birds spoil iron in their maws of greed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a soil where nought save horrid Want abounds,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>parting the Berber’s from the Blackmoor’s grounds.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“We past the limit where, his southing done,<span class="linenum">7</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Sol guides his chariot t’oward his northern goal;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where lie the Races whence Clyméné’s son</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the clear bright colour of the daylight stole;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Here laving strangest peoples loves to run</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">black Sanagá in tropick summer cool;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where th’ Arsenarium Cape its name hath lost,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>yclept Cape Verd by us that keep the coast.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Now past Canaria’s archipelago,—<span class="linenum">8</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘Fortunate Isles’ of olden mariners these,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the waves that play around the Maids we plow</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of agèd Hesper, hight Hesperides:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-110" id="noteref-110">[110]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Lands ever new, whose wonders greater grow</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">upon the sight, uprose our eyne to please:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Then with a prosp’rous wind we took the port,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to take provision of the wonted sort.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Now at his Island was the harbour tane,<span class="linenum">9</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_182">[Pg. 182]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that warrior Sanct ‘Iago’s name did take;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a Saint who often holp the sons of Spain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">brave slaught’ering of the Moorish man to make.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hence while a favouring Boreas fanned the Main,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">once more we sped to cut the vasty lake</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of briny Ocean, while beneath the wave</span>
        <br/>
        <span>settled the shore that sweet refreshment gave.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Compast our courses thence the greater part<span class="linenum">10</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Africk, eastward left her continent:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The province Joloff which, disposed athwart,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">departs in tribes the Negro ’habitant;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">mighty Mandinga-land by whose good art</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the rich and lucid ore for us is sent,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which curvèd Gámbia’s wealth of waters drinketh</span>
        <br/>
        <span>ere in Atlantis’ breadth his current sinketh:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“We past the Dorcades,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-111" id="noteref-111">[111]</a>
          those isles assign’d<span class="linenum">11</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of the Weird Sisters erst the home to be,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who born of several vision reft and blind,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">made single eye-ball serve for all the three:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thou, only thou, whose crispy locks entwin’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">frore Neptune fired’st in his realm, the sea,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>than ev’ery foulest monster fouler still</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the burning sand with viper-brood didst fill.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span class="pagenum" id="Page_183">[Pg 183]</span> <br/>
        <span>“In fine with pointed Prow t’oward Austral shore<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-112" id="noteref-112">[112]</a><span class="linenum">12</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">across the vastest Guinea Gulf we stray’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">leaving the rugged Range where Lyons roar</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and Cape of Palmas called from palmy shade:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The Rio Grande,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-113" id="noteref-113">[113]</a> where the thund’erous Bore</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">roars on our noted coasts, we left and made</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that goodly Island named from him who tried</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to thrust his finger in the God-man’s side.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-114" id="noteref-114">[114]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“There the broad shores of Congo kingdom show,<span class="linenum">13</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whilom by us convert to faith of <span class="smcap">Christ</span>,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where long Zaïré’s deep clear waters flow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">River by men of old unseen, unwist:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And now in fine the wide-spread seas I plow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">far from Callisto’s well-known Pole, and list</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to pass the torrid heats beneath the Line,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which doth the centre of our Sphere define.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“And now our vision had afront descried,<span class="linenum">14</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_184">[Pg. 184]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">there in the new half-heav’en a meteor new,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">unseen by other men, who or denied,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">or held it doubtful, an ’twere false or true:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">We saw the Firm’ament’s darker, duller side,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">aye scant of stellar light where stars be few,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and the fixt Pole where man may not agree</span>
        <br/>
        <span>if other land begin, or end the sea.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Thus passing forward we the regions gain,<span class="linenum">15</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where twice Apollo’s yearly passage lies,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">twin winters making, and of summers twain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while he from Pole to Pole alternate flies:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Through calms and storms, caprices of the Main,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of angry Æolus sea-sent tyrannies,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>we saw the Bears, despite of Juno, lave</span>
        <br/>
        <span>their tardy bodies in the boreal wave.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“To tell the many dangers of the deep,<span class="linenum">16</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sea-changes landsman never apprehendeth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sudden Tornados, storms the seas that sweep,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Levens, whose fire the depths of air accendeth;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">black nights when Heav’en in rain-flood seems to weep,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and Thunders bellowing till the welkin rendeth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>were but lost labour, and would do me wrong,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>e’en were I dower’d with an iron tongue.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Portents I witness’d, which rude mariners<span class="linenum">17</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_185">[Pg. 185]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by long experience wont their lore to try,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">vouch for veracious, while each one avers</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">things must be truthful when they meet his eye:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">These the sound judgment of the Sage prefers;—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">or taught by Science or pure Wits to ’spy</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the hidden secrets which in Nature brood,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to judge misfacts, or facts mis-understood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“I saw, and clearly saw, the living Light,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-115" id="noteref-115">[115]</a><span class="linenum">18</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which sailor-people hold their Patron-saint,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in times of trouble and the winds’ rude fight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and sable orcan when man’s heart is faint.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Nor less to one and all ’twas exquisite</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">marvel, surpassing power of wonderment,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to see the sea-based clouds, with bulky shaft,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>upheaving Ocean’s depth with sucking draught.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Certès I saw it (nor can I presume<span class="linenum">19</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">my sight deceivèd me) as high it grew,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">an airy vapourlet, a subtle fume</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which, caught by windy currents, whirling flew:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thence tow’ering tall to circumpolar gloom</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a Tube appeared so thin, so faint of hue,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that man’s unaidèd sight could hardly see it:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Yet of some cloudy substance seemed to be it.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Little by little growing high in air,<span class="linenum">20</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_186">[Pg. 186]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with bigger girth than biggest mast it loomèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">here slim its middle, broad its bosom, where</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">great gulps of water were in floods enwombèd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The wave of ev’ery Wave it seemed to share;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while gathered vapours o’er its summit gloomèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>increasing ever more, and overchargèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as the huge water-load its bulk enlargèd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“E’en as a ruddy Leech sometimes is seen<span class="linenum">21</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">fixt on the lips of beeve (that careless stood</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to drink on frigid fountain’s hem of green),</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">slaking her fire of thirst with alien blood:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Sucking, she rounds her form with hunger lean;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and swills and swells till full of gory food:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Thus the grand column greater volume gaineth</span>
        <br/>
        <span>itself, and heavier weight of cloud sustaineth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But, when ’twas wholly filled, and fully fed,<span class="linenum">22</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">withdrawn the footing planted on the Main,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">athwart the welkin pouring floods it fled,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with water bathing ’jacent watery plain;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and all the waves it suckt in waves it shed;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wherein no salty savour mote remain.</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Now let our Sages deft in Script expose</span>
        <br/>
        <span>what mighty secrets these which Nature shows.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Had the Philosophers, who fared of eld<span class="linenum">23</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_187">[Pg. 187]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so far the Wonders of the World to find,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Miracles which I beheld, beheld;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the canvas spreading to such divers wind;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">what many weighty volumes had they fill’d!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">what pow’er to Stars and Signs had they assign’d!</span>
        <br/>
        <span>what growth to knowledge! what rare qualities!</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and all the purest Truth that scorneth lies.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Five times the Planet, which maintains her place<span class="linenum">24</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in the first sky, her swifter course had made,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-116" id="noteref-116">[116]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">now showing half and then her full of face,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while over Ocean our Armada sped:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">When poised on topmost yard, in giddy space,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘Land!’ shouts a lynx-eyed sailor, ‘land ahead!’</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Hurry the crews on deck in huge delight</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and over Orient sky-rim strain their sight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“In misty manner ’gan their shapes to show<span class="linenum">25</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the highland-range attracting all our eyes;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the pond’erous anchors stood we prompt to throw,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and furl the canvas which now useless lies:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And that with surer knowledge mote we know</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the parts so distant which before us rise,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with Astrolábos, novel instrument,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which safe and subtle judgment did invent:</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“We landed, lost no time, on long and wide<span class="linenum">26</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_188">[Pg. 188]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Bight,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-117" id="noteref-117">[117]</a> and
          the seamen scattered ’bout the shore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to see what curious things be there descried,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where none descried or ever trod before:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But with my Pilots I retired aside</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on farther sands, our landfall to explore;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and lief the solar altitude would span,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and map the painted world in chart and plan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Here had our wand’ering course outrun, we found,<span class="linenum">27</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Semi-capran Fish the final goal,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-118" id="noteref-118">[118]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">standing atween him and the gelid round,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Earth’s austral portion, the more secret Pole.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Sudden I see my crew a man surround,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">complexion’d sooty as the charrèd coal,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>tane as he hied him far from home to take</span>
        <br/>
        <span>combs of rich honey from the hilly brake.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“He comes with troubled gest and gait, as though<span class="linenum">28</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he ne’er had found him in such fell extreme;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor he our speech, nor we his jargon know,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a salvage worse than brutal Polypheme:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Of the fine fleecy store to him I show</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Colchos-treasure, gentle ore supreme,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the virgin silver, spices rich and rare,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>yet seemed the Sylvan nought for these to care.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Then bade I baser things be brought to his view,<span class="linenum">29</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_189">[Pg. 189]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">bunches of glassy beads transparent bright,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of little tinkling falcon-bells a few,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a cap of cramoisie that glads the sight.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">By signs and signals then I saw and knew,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in such cheap trash he takes a child’s delight:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>I bid them loose him with his treasures all,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when off he hurries for the nearest kraal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“His friends and neighbours on the following day,<span class="linenum">30</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">all mother-nude, with night-entinctur’d skin,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">adown their asp’erous hillocks fand their way,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lárgesse and gifts their mate had won, to win:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">In crowds they gather’d and so tame were they,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the show of softness bred much daring in</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Fernam Velloso’s brain to see the land,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and thread the bushes with the barbarous band.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Now doth Velloso on his arm rely<span class="linenum">31</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and, being arr’ogant, weens to wend secure;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but when already overtime goes by</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wherein no sign of good I can procure;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">standing with face upturned in hope to ’spy</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the bold Adv’enturer, lo! adown the dure</span>
        <br/>
        <span>hillocks appears he, making for the shore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with more of hurry than he showed before.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Coelho’s galley lightly rowed for land<span class="linenum">32</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_190">[Pg. 190]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to take him off, but ere the shore she made</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a burly Blackmoor cast a bully hand</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on him, for fear their prisoner evade:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Others and others coming, soon the band</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">grappleth Velloso, who finds none to aid;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>I haste, our gallant oarsmen strenuous working,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when shows a Negro flock<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-119" id="noteref-119">[119]</a> in ambush lurking.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Now from the clashing cloud a rattling rain<span class="linenum">33</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of shafts and stones began on us to pour,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor did they hurtle through the lift in vain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for thence my leg this hurt of arrow bore.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But we, like men with causes to complain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">send such thick-woven answer strong and sore</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that from their exploit gainèd some, perhaps,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a blush of honours crimson as their caps.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“And, saved Velloso from such imm’inent fate,<span class="linenum">34</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">fast to the Squadron both the boats retirèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">seeing the rude intent and ugly hate</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of brutes by bestial rage and malice firèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from whom no better tidings could we ’wait</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">anent that India-land, the dear-desirèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>save it lay far, far, far, the fellows said:—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Once more the canvas to the breeze I spread.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Then to Velloso quoth a mate in jest<span class="linenum">35</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_191">[Pg. 191]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(while all with meaning smile the jibe attend),</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘Holá, Velloso! sure that hilly crest</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">is hard to climb as easy to descend.’</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘Yea, true!’ the daring volunteer confest;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘but when so many curs afar I ken’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span>packing, I hurried, for I ’gan to doubt me</span>
        <br/>
        <span>ill-luck might catch you were ye there without me.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“He then recounted how, when duly made<span class="linenum">36</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that wooded Mount, the blacks of whom I speak,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his further travel o’er the land forbade</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">threat’ening unless he turn death-wrong to wreak:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Then, straight returning, ambuscade they laid,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that we when landing a lost mate to seek,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>might straight be banisht to the Reign obscure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that at more leisure they the loot secure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But now five other suns had come and gone,<span class="linenum">37</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">since from our landfall went we forth to plow</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">seas to the seaman still unseen, unknown,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while from astern the breezes favouring blow;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when, as a night closed in, all careless strown</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Crew kept watch upon the cutting Prow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>deep’ening the welkin’s darkling hues, a cloud</span>
        <br/>
        <span>sails high o’erhead, and seems the sky to shroud.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“It came so chargèd with such tem’erous stride<span class="linenum">38</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_192">[Pg. 192]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in every falt’ering heart blank fear it bred:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Roars from afar and raves the sombre tide</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as though vain thunder’ing on some rocky head:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘Almighty Pow’r, o’er worlds sublime!’ I cried,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘what threat from Heaven, or what secret dread,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>shall now this climate and this sea deform,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>what greater horror than the natural storm?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“These words I ended not, when saw we rise<span class="linenum">39</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a Shape in air, enormous, sore the view o’it;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a Form disformèd of a giant size;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">frownèd its face; the long beard squalid grew o’it;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">its mien dire menacing; its cavern’d eyes</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">glared ghastly ’mid the mouldy muddy hue o’it;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>stainèd a clayey load its crispy hair</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and coal-black lips its yellow tusks lay bare.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“So vast its eerie members, well I can<span class="linenum">40</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">assure thee, all the double deemed to sight</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Rhodes’ Colossus, whose inord’inate span</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">one of the world’s Seven Wonders once was hight.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But when its gross and horrent tones began</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to sound as surged from Ocean’s deepest night:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>ah! crept the flesh, and stood the hair of me</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and all, that gruesome Thing to hear and see.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘O rasher, bolder Race:’—’twas thus it spoke,—<span class="linenum">41</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_193">[Pg. 193]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘than all whose daring deeds have tempted Fate;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">thou, whom no labours tame nor war’s fell stroke,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor rest wilt grant on human toils to ’wait:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Since these forbidden bounds by thee are broke</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who durst my Virgin Seas to violate,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which long I guardèd, where I ne’er allow</span>
        <br/>
        <span>plowing to foreign or to native prow:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Since the dark secrets com’st thou here to ’spy<span class="linenum">42</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Nature and her humid element,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which from Man’s highest lore deep hidden lie,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on noble or immortal mission sent;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from me the Terrors which ye dare defy</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">hear now, the sequence of thy rash intent,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>o’er ev’ery largest Sea, o’er ev’ery Land</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which still thy cruel conquest shall command.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘This know, what ships shall sail my waters o’er<span class="linenum">43</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and brave, as brav’est thou me, to work my worst;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to them assurèd foe shall prove my shore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where blow the storm-winds, and the tempests burst:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hear! the first Squadron<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-120" id="noteref-120">[120]</a> that shall dare explore</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and through my restless waves shall cleave the first,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>such improvisèd chastisement shall see,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>more than all dangers shall the damage be.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘An Hope deceive not, here I hope to deal<span class="linenum">44</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_194">[Pg. 194]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">consummate vengeance on th’ Explorer’s head;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-121" id="noteref-121">[121]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor he the latest shall my fury feel</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by pertinacious confidence ybred;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nay, ye shall ev’ery year see many a keel</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(if me my judgment here hath not misled)</span>
        <br/>
        <span>such wrecks endure, shall see such fate befall,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that Death shall seem the lightest ill of all.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘And to the first illustrious Leader<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-122" id="noteref-122">[122]</a> whom<span class="linenum">45</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Fame’s favour raiseth till he touch the skies,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">I will give novel and eternal tomb,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by the dark sentence of a God all-wise:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Here of hard Turkish fleet that dree’d his doom,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he shall depose the prideful prosp’erous prize;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>here shall at length my wrath and wrack surpass a</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Quíloa in ruins and a rent Mombasah.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Shall come Another, eke of honour’d fame,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-123" id="noteref-123">[123]</a><span class="linenum">46</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a Knight of loving heart and liberal hand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and he shall bring his dainty darling Dame,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Love’s choicest treasure bound by Hymen’s band:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Ah, sore the sorrow, dark the day when came</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the pair to this my hard and hateful land,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>condemn’d from cruel wreck their lives to save</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and, suffer’ed toils untold, to find a grave.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘Shall see slow starving die their children dear,<span class="linenum">47</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_195">[Pg. 195]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sweet pledges bred of love, in fond love born;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">shall see the Caffres, greedy race and fere,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">strip the fair Ladye of her raiment torn:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Shall see those limbs, as chrystal light and clear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by suns, and frosts, and winds, and weather worn,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when cease to tread, o’er long drawn miles, the heat</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of sandy waste those delicatest feet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“And, more, shall see their eyne, whom Fate shall spare<span class="linenum">48</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from ills so dreadful, from so dire a blow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the two sad lovers left in mis’ery, where</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">implac’able thorns and terrible thickets glow:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">There, when the stones wax soft at their despair,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">shown by their ceaseless woe, sigh, groan, tear, throe,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>in a last strained embrace their souls exhale</span>
        <br/>
        <span>from out the fairest, fondest, saddest jail.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“The fearful Monster would more ills unfold,<span class="linenum">49</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our doom disclosing, when aloud cried I:—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘Who art thou, whose immense stupendous mould,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">pardie, is mighty miracle to mine eye?’</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">His lips and dingy orbs he wreathed and roll’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and with a sudden frightful wailing cry,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>in slow and bitter accents he replied</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as though the question probed and galled his pride:</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘I am that hidden mighty Head of Land,<span class="linenum">50</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_196">[Pg. 196]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Cape of Tempests fitly named by you,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which Ptol’emy, Mela, Strabo never fand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor Pliny dreamt of, nor old Sages knew:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Here in South Ocean end I Africk strand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where my unviewèd Point ye come to view,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which to the far Antarctick Pole extendeth;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>such he your daring rashness dire offendeth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Encelados, and Terra’s Titan brood,<span class="linenum">51</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Ægæon and the Centiman, the line</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of me, who Adamástor hight, withstood</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the hand that hurleth Vulcan’s bolt divine:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hill upon hill to pile was not my mood;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to conquer Ocean-waves was my design;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>I went to seek, as Captain of the Main,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the fleet of Neptune which I sought in vain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘For Peleus’ high-born spouse my burning love<span class="linenum">52</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lurèd me rashly to such rude emprize;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the belles of heaven ne’er my breast could move</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">mine Ocean-Empress filled my yearning eyes:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">One day I saw her with the Nereids rove,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">all bare and beauteous, ’neath the summer skies:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and in such manner she bewitcht my will</span>
        <br/>
        <span>no other feeling can my bosom fill.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘But as my Ladye’s grace I could not gain<span class="linenum">53</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_197">[Pg. 197]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for being homely, huge of form and face,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">I sware by forceful rape my want t’ obtain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and so to Doris I disclosed my case:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">In dread she told her child my loving pain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when modest Thetis, with her merry grace,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>replied:—‘What Nymph can boast, whate’er her charms,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the strength to wrestle in a Giant’s arms?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Algates, that Ocean may once more be free<span class="linenum">54</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from this sad Warfare, I some mode will find,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to gar mine honour with his suit agree;’</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">thus was the message to mine ear consign’d.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">I, who no treach’erous snare in aught could see</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(for lovers’ blindness is exceeding blind)</span>
        <br/>
        <span>felt with a buoyant hope my bosom bound,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and hopes of passion by possession crown’d.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Love madden’d, moonstruck, now I fled the war,<span class="linenum">55</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and kindly Doris named the trysting-night;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">at length my lovely love I saw appear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">my winsome Thetis, in her robeless white:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Like one possest I hurried from afar</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">opeing mine arms to clasp the life and sprite</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of this my body, and hot kisses rain</span>
        <br/>
        <span>upon her cheeks, her locks, her glorious eyne.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘Ah! how it irks to tell my sad disgrace!<span class="linenum">56</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_198">[Pg. 198]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">thinking my lover in these arms to hold,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">mine arms a rugged Mountain did embrace,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yclad with bramble bush, a horrid wold:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Before this rock, upstanding face to face,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which for that Angel front I did enfold,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>no more was I a Man, no! lorn and lone</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a rock, a stone, I stood before a stone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Oh Nymph! the loveliest born that bare the Main,<span class="linenum">57</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">alb’eit my presence ne’er by thee was sought,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">how could my poor delusion cause thee pain?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Why not be mountain, cloud, rock, vision, nought?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Raging I wandered forth well-nigh insane</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for yearning grief with foul dishonour fraught,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to seek another world, where none could see</span>
        <br/>
        <span>my trickling tears, and scoff at them and me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘Meanwhile my brethren, who the conquest lost,<span class="linenum">58</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">crusht in extremest conquer’d mis’ery pinèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whom, for more surety, that vain-glorious host</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of upstart Gods ’neath various Mounts consignèd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And, as Immortals scoff at mortal boast,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">I, to my sorrows in no wise resignèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>felt Fate, mine awful foe, begin to shape</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a dreadful vengeance for my daring rape.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘My flesh slow hardens into solid earth,<span class="linenum">59</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_199">[Pg. 199]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to rocks and horrid crags enstone my bones;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">these limbs thou seest and this mighty girth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">extend where desert Ocean raves and moans:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">In fine, the giant-stature of my birth</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to this far Headland sprent with rocks and stones</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Gods debased; and doubling all my woes,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>round me white, winsome, watery Thetis flows.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Thus parlied he; and with appalling cry,<span class="linenum">60</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from out our sight the gruesome Monster died;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the black cloud melted, and arose on high</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sonorous thunders rollèd by the tide.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">To th’ Angel-choirs with hands upraisèd, I—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">invisible Controuls so long our guide,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>prayed God in pity would those Ills withhold,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by Adamástor for our Race foretold.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Now Pyroeis and Phlegon ’gan appear<span class="linenum">61</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with th’ other pair that hale the radiant wain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when the tall heights of Table Mount we spere,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which from the mighty Giant form hath tane:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Standing along now easting shores we steer,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and cleave the waters of the Lévant main,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the coast-line hugging with a northing Prow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and sight a second landfall o’er the bow.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-124" id="noteref-124">[124]</a></span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“The native owners of this other land,<span class="linenum">62</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_200">[Pg. 200]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the burnisht livery of Æthiops wore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yet was their bearing more humane and bland,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">than those who so mistreated us before.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">With dance and joyous feasts, a merry band</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">approacht us tripping on the sandy shore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>bringing their Women and fat herds that grace</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the pastures, gentle kine of high-bred race.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“The bronzèd Women, scorcht by burning clime,<span class="linenum">63</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">astraddle rode the slow-paced gentle Steer,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">beasts which their owners hold of beeves the prime,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">better than any of the herds they rear:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Pastoral canticles, or prose, or rhyme,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">concerted in their mother-tongue we hear;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and to the rustick reed sweet tunes they teach,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as Tit’yrus chaunted ’neath his spreading beech.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“These, who seemed glad to see the guest abide<span class="linenum">64</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">amid them, greeted us with friendly mood,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and many a fatted fowl and sheep supplied,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">their goods exchanging for the things deemed good:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But though my comrades tried, they vainly tried,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for not a word in fine was understood</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that of our search a signal might convey:—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Anchor I weighèd, and I sailed away.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Now here in mighty gyre our flight had flown<span class="linenum">65</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_201">[Pg. 201]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">round Blackmoor Africk shore; and now regainèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our Prores the torrid heat of Middle Zone,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while Pole Antarctick far in rear remainèd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">We left astern an Islet<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-125" id="noteref-125">[125]</a> first made known</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by the first Squadron whose long toils attainèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Cape of Tempests; and, that Islet found,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>ended her voyage at its bourne and bound.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Thence drave we, cutting for a length of days,—<span class="linenum">66</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where storms and sadd’ening calms alternate range,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">undreamèd Oceans and unpathèd ways,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our sole conductor Hope in toils so strange:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Long time we struggled with the sea’s wild maze,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">till, as its general Law is changeless Change,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>we met a current<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-126" id="noteref-126">[126]</a> with
          such speed that sped,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>against the flow ’twas hard to forge ahead.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Of this prevailing flood the puissant force,<span class="linenum">67</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which to the southward our Armada hove,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">such set opposèd to our northing course,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the winds to waft us onwards vainly strove:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Till Notus fashed to find us fare the worse,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(it seems) in struggle with the drift that drove,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>enforced his blasts, and with such choler blew</span>
        <br/>
        <span>maugre the mighty current on we drew.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Reducèd Sol that famed and sacred Day,<span class="linenum">68</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_202">[Pg. 202]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wherein three Kings in Orient region crown’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a King came seeking who belittled lay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a King in whom three Kings in One are bound:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">That morn to other hythe we made our way</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">finding the peoples that before we found,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by a broad River, and we gave it name</span>
        <br/>
        <span>from the high hol’iday when to port we came.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-127" id="noteref-127">[127]</a></span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Sweet food we barter’d from their scanty store,<span class="linenum">69</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sweet water from their stream; but natheless here</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">gained we no tidings of that Indian shore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from men to us that almost dumblings were.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">See now, O King! what distant regions o’er</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Earth we wandered, peoples rude and fere,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>nor news nor signal had our labours earnèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of the fair East for which our spirits yearnèd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Imagine, prithee, what a piteous state<span class="linenum">70</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">must have been ours when all save life was gone,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by hunger broken and the storm’s wild hate,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and curst by novel climes and seas unknown:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Our hearts despaired of Hope deferred so late,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">till dull Despair had marked us for her own;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>toiling beneath those strange unnat’ural skies,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>our northern nature’s fellest enemies.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“And now decayed and damaged waxt our food,<span class="linenum">71</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_203">[Pg. 203]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sore damaging the wasted frame of man,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">without one comfort, sans one gleam of good,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">not e’en Hope’s flatt’ering tale nor Fancy vain:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Dost think that Sailor of the sturdiest mood,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">or any Soldier save the Lusitan,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>perchance, had loyalty so long preservèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span>both for his King and for the Chief he servèd?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Dost think, the wretches had not mutinied<span class="linenum">72</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">against the Head who with their mood had striven,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">parforce becoming Pyrats, turned aside</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from duty, by despair, want, hunger driven?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">In very sooth these men were sorely tried,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">since from their hearts ne moil ne toil hath driven</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Portingall-excellence, abounding still</span>
        <br/>
        <span>in leal valour and obedient will.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Leaving in fine that Port of fair sweet flood,<span class="linenum">73</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and, dight once more to cut the salty spray;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">off from the coast-line for a spell we stood,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">till deep blue water ’neath our kelsons lay;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for frigid Notus, in his fainty mood,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">was fain to drive us leewards to the Bay</span>
        <br/>
        <span>made in that quarter by the crookèd shore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whence rich Sofála sendeth golden ore.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“This Sea-bight passing far, the nimble helm,<span class="linenum">74</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_204">[Pg. 204]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by men to saintly Nicholas assignèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where roaring Ocean raves on Terra’s realm,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">this and that vessel’s prore eftsoons inclinèd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And now from hearts which hopes and fears o’erwhelm,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">hearts in such faith t’ a fragile plank resignèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as hope grew hopeless, esperance despair,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>good sudden tidings banisht cark and care.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“And thus it happed, as near the shore we went<span class="linenum">75</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where beach and valley lay in clearest view,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a stream whose course in ocean there was spent,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-128" id="noteref-128">[128]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">showèd of sails that came and went a few.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Good sooth, to greatest joyaunce all gave vent,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when first we sighted mariners who knew</span>
        <br/>
        <span>mariner-practice; for we here were bound</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to find some tidings which, indeed, we found.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“All Æthiopians are, yet ’twould appear,<span class="linenum">76</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">they held communion with men better bred:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Some words of Arab parlance here we hear</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">imported sounds their mother-speech amid:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">A flimsy wrapper of tree-wool they wear</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a-twisted tight about each kinky head;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>while other pieces dipt in azure tinct,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>are round their middles and their shame precinct.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“In Arab language, which they little know,<span class="linenum">77</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_205">[Pg. 205]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but which Fernam Martins well comprehendeth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ships great as ours, they say, scud to and fro</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">piercing the waters with the beak that rendeth:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But there where Phœbus leaps in air, they go</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whither the broad’ening coast to south extendeth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>then from south sunwards;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-129" id="noteref-129">[129]</a> and a Land is there</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of folk like us and like the daylight fair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Here was each bosom with rare gladness cheerèd<span class="linenum">78</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by the good people, and their news much more:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">From all the signals in this stream appearèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">‘Stream of Good Signals’ christened we the shore:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">A marble column on this coast we rearèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whereof, to mark such spots, a few we bore;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>its name that lovely Angel-youth supplied<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-130" id="noteref-130">[130]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span>who did Thobias to Gabáël guide.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Of shells and oysters, and the weedy load,<span class="linenum">79</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the noisome offspring of the Main profound,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">we cleansed our kelsons which the long sea-road</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">brought to careening cloggèd and immund:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Our blameless Æthiops, who not far abode,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with pleasing jocund proffers flockt around</span>
        <br/>
        <span>supplying maintenance we mainly sought,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>pure of all leasing, free from feigning thought.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Yet from our esp’erance great, our hopes immense<span class="linenum">80</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_206">[Pg. 206]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">bred by this seaboard, was not pure and true</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the joy we joyed; nay, cruel recompense</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">dealt us Rhamnúsia, sorrows strange and new.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thus smiling Heav’en mixt favours doth dispense;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in such condition dark and dure man drew</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the breath of Life; and, while all Ills endure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Good changeth often, Good is never sure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“And ’twas that sickness of a sore disgust,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-131" id="noteref-131">[131]</a><span class="linenum">81</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the worst I ever witness’d, came and stole</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the lives of many; and far alien dust</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">buried for aye their bones in saddest dole.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Who but eye-witness e’er my words could trust?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of such disform and dreadful manner swole</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the mouth and gums, that grew proud flesh in foyson</span>
        <br/>
        <span>till gangrene seemèd all the blood to poyson:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Gangrene that carried foul and fulsome taint,<span class="linenum">82</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">spreading infection through the neighb’ouring air:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">No cunning Leach aboard our navy went,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">much less a subtle Chirurgeon was there;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but some whose knowledge of the craft was faint</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">strove as they could the poisoned part to pare,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as though ’twere dead; and here they did aright;—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>all were Death’s victims who had caught the blight.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“At last in tangled brake and unknown ground,<span class="linenum">83</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_207">[Pg. 207]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our true companions lost for aye, we leave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who ’mid such weary ways, such dreary round,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">such dread adventures aidance ever gave.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">How easy for man’s bones a grave is found!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Earth’s any wrinkle, Ocean’s any wave.</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whereso the long home be, abroad, at home,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for ev’ery Hero’s corse may lend a tomb.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“When from that Haven we resumed our way<span class="linenum">84</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while brighter hopes with darker hearts combine’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">we opèd Ocean where the down coast lay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">expecting surer signal e’er to find:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">At last we rode in rude Mozámbic Bay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of whose vile leasing, and whose villain kind</span>
        <br/>
        <span>thou must have knowledge; and the foul deceit</span>
        <br/>
        <span>wherewith Mombásah would her guests defeat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Until safe anchored in thy harbour, rife<span class="linenum">85</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with all the gracious guest-rites that bestow</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">health on the living, on the dying life,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">God in His pity pleased the way to show:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Here rest, here sweet repose from grief, toil, strife,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">new Peace appeasing ev’ry want and woe</span>
        <br/>
        <span>thou gavest us: Now, if hast heard me well</span>
        <br/>
        <span>told is the tale thou badest me to tell.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Judge then, O King! an over Earth e’er went<span class="linenum">86</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_208">[Pg. 208]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">men who would ’tempt such paths of risk and dread?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Dost deem Æneas, or e’en eloquent</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Ulysses, fared so far this Earth to tread?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Did any dare to see the Sea’s extent</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">howe’er the Muse their Gestes hath sung or said,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as I by force of will and skill have seen</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and still shall see; or e’en the eighth, I ween?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“This, who so deeply drank of Fount Aonian,<span class="linenum">87</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">o’er whom contend in conquest peregrine</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Rhodes, Ios, Smyrna, with the Colophonian</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Athens and Argos and the Salamine:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And that, the lustre of the land Ausonian,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose voice altis’onous and whose lyre divine</span>
        <br/>
        <span>his native Mincius hearing, sinks to sleep,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>while Tyber’s waves with pride and pleasure leap:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Sing, laud and write they both in wild extremes<span class="linenum">88</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of these their Demigods, and prowess vaunt</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on fabled Magians, Circes, Polyphemes,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and Sirens lulling with the sleepy chaunt:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Send them to plow with oar and sail the streams</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Cicons; on th’ oblivious lands descant</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where slumb’erous Lotus-eaters dazed and died;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>e’en be their Pilot whelmed in Ocean-tide:</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Storms let them loosen from the Bags of Wind,<span class="linenum">89</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_209">[Pg. 209]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">create Calypsos captivate by love;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">make Harpies’ touch contam’inate all they find,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and in sad Hades make their Heroes rove;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">however much, o’er much, they have refine’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">such fabled tales, which Poet’s fancy prove,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the simple naked truth my story telleth</span>
        <br/>
        <span>all their grandiloquence of writ excelleth.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Fast on our Captain’s facund lips depends<span class="linenum">90</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as drunk with wonder, all that soul-wrapt crowd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">until at length his travel-story ends;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his tale that told of noble deeds and proud.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The high-conceiv’ed intent the King commends</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Kings to not’able feats of warfare vow’d:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Their Lieges’ old and val’orous strain extols,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>their loyal spirits and their noble souls.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Th’ admiring audience to recount are fain<span class="linenum">91</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">each case, as each one best could understand:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">None from the hardy Folk could turn their eyne</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who by such long-drawn ways the waves had span’d.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now, as the Delian youth turns round the rein</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Lampetia’s brother held with feeble hand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and in the Thetian arms way-weary falls;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the King hies sea-borne to his royal halls.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>How pleasant sound the praise and well-won glory<span class="linenum">92</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_210">[Pg. 210]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of man’s own exploits as man hears them chime!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for noble travail, actions digne of story,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that dim or equal those of passèd Time.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Envy of famous feats untransitory</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">hath ’gendered thousand thousand deeds sublime:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>The Brave who loves to tread in Valour’s ways</span>
        <br/>
        <span>pants for the pleasure of his fellows’ praise.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Achilles’ glorious feats could not so ’flame,<span class="linenum">93</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor Alexander’s soul to fight inspirèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as he who sang in numbered verse his name;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">such praise, such honour most his soul desirèd.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Nought but the trophies of Miltiades’ fame</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">could rouse Themistocles with envy firèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>who owned his highest joy, his best delight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>came from the voices which his feats recite.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Vasco da Gama striveth hard to prove<span class="linenum">94</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that these old travels in world-song resounding</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">merit not glory nor men’s hearts may move</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">like his sore travails Heav’en and Earth astounding.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Yes! but that Hero, whose esteem and love</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">crownèd with praise, prize, honours, gifts abounding</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Lyre of Mantua, taught her Bard to chaunt</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Æneas’ name, and Rome’s high glories vaunt.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Scipios and Cæsars giveth Lusia-land,<span class="linenum">95</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_211">[Pg. 211]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">gives Alexanders and Augusti gives;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but she withal may not the gifts command</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose want rears rough and ready working-lives:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Octavius, prest by Fortune’s heaviest hand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with compt and learned verse her wrong survives.</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Nor, certès, Fulvia shall this truth deny,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Gláphyra’s<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-132" id="noteref-132">[132]</a> wit entrapt
          her Anthony.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Goes Cæsar subjugating gen’eral France,<span class="linenum">96</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yet worked his arms to Science no offence;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">this hand the Pen compelling, that the Lance</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he vied with Cicero’s gift of eloquence:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">What most doth Scipio’s name and fame enhance</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">is of the Com’edy deep experience:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>What Homer wrote that Alexander read,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>we know, whose roll ne’er left his couch’s head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>In fine, the nations own no Lord of Men<span class="linenum">97</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that lackt a cultured learnèd phantasy,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Grecian, Latian, or barbarian strain;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">only the Lusian lacking it we see.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Not without shame I say so, but ’twere vain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to hope for high triumphant Poesy</span>
        <br/>
        <span>till men our Rhymes, our Songs shall lay to heart;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for minds Art-ign’orant aye look down on Art.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>For this, and not for Nature’s fault, be sure<span class="linenum">98</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_212">[Pg. 212]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Virgil nor Homer rise to strike the lyre;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor shall rise ever, an this mode endure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">pious Æneas or Achilles dire.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But,—worst of all,—it maketh man so dour,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">austere, rough, frigid to poetic fire;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>so rude, so heedless to be known or know,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>few heed the want and many will it so.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Let grateful Gama to my Muse give grace,<span class="linenum">99</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for the great patriot-love that gars her sound</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Lyre for all her Sons, and aye retrace</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the name and fame of ways and wars renown’d:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Nor he, nor they who call themselves his race</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">e’er in Calliope a friend so found,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>or from the Tagus-maidens boon could claim,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to leave their golden webs and hymn his name.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Because fraternal love and friendly will<span class="linenum">100</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that deals to every Lusian Brave his meed</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of laud, this thought, these resolutions fill</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">my gentle Tagides; and this their creed.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Yet ne’er let human bosom cease to thrill</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with Hope to dare and do some mighty deed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>since or by these or, haply, other ways,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>he ne’er shall forfeit prizes, value, praise.</span>
      </p>
      </div></blockquote>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-v-endnotes">

      <h4>Canto V. Endnotes.</h4>

      <ol start="107">

      <li id="note-107"><p>Sol entering Leo (Northern Tropic). <a href="#noteref-107" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-108"><p>The glorious Brazil. <a href="#noteref-108" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-109"><p>Senegalese of “Sanagá” (Senegal). <a href="#noteref-109" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-110"><p>The Cape Verd Islands. <a href="#noteref-110" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-111"><p>Alias Gorgades: Fernando Po, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="#noteref-111" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-112">
        <p>12 <i>a</i>. Not in Camoens. “S’a Leone,” August, 1874.</p>

        <blockquote class="poetry"><div>
          <p>
            <span>“What sights this lovely scene shall soon unbless,</span>
            <br/>
            <span class="i2">the simiad Negro swaying Africk strand;</span>
            <br/>
            <span class="i2">inhuman humans, slaves in Freedom’s dress;</span>
            <br/>
            <span class="i2">Ah me! what rude and wild and couthless band:</span>
            <br/>
            <span class="i2">Females with ne’er a ‘No,’ males dumb to ‘Yes,’</span>
            <br/>
            <span class="i2">lust, superstition, ign’orance curse the land;</span>
            <br/>
            <span>fair dwelling-places where the foulest dwell;</span>
            <br/>
            <span>the Blackman’s Heaven, and the White Man’s Hell.” <a href="#noteref-112" class="pginternal">↩</a></span>
          </p>
          </div></blockquote>
          </li>

      <li id="note-113"><p><abbr title="North">N. </abbr> <abbr title="latitute">lat.</abbr> 11° south of Sierra Leone. <a href="#noteref-113" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-114"><p><abbr title="São">S.</abbr> Thomé. <a href="#noteref-114" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-115"><p>Saint Elmo’s fire. <a href="#noteref-115" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-116"><p>The moon moving faster than the sun. <a href="#noteref-116" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-117"><p>Angra de Sancta Helena, <abbr title="South">S.</abbr> <abbr title="latitute">lat.</abbr> 32° 40’. <a href="#noteref-117" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-118"><p>Tropic of Capricorn. <a href="#noteref-118" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-119"><p>In <abbr title="original">orig.</abbr>, <i lang="pt">bando</i>, applied to birds. <a href="#noteref-119" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-120"><p>Of Pedr’ Alvares Cabral. <a href="#noteref-120" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-121"><p>Bartholomeu Dias. <a href="#noteref-121" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-122"><p><abbr title="Dom">D.</abbr> Francisco de Almeida. <a href="#noteref-122" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-123"><p><abbr title="Dom">D.</abbr> Manoel de Souza. <a href="#noteref-123" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-124"><p>Angra de Sam Braz (<abbr title="Saint">St.</abbr> Blaise), 70 leagues <abbr title="East">E.</abbr> of the Cape. <a href="#noteref-124" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-125"><p>Sancta Cruz of <abbr title="Bartolomeu">Bart.</abbr> Dias. <a href="#noteref-125" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-126"><p>Off Cabo das Correntes. <a href="#noteref-126" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-127"><p>Rio-dos-Reis; twelfth day <abbr>O. S.</abbr>, <abbr title="January">Jan.</abbr> 9. <a href="#noteref-127" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-128"><p>The Cuama-Zambeze mouth. <a href="#noteref-128" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-129"><p><i>i.e.</i> to south-east. <a href="#noteref-129" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-130"><p>The Archangel Raphael. <a href="#noteref-130" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-131"><p>Scurvy, first poetically described here. <a href="#noteref-131" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-132"><p>Cleopatra (says Faria y Sousa). <a href="#noteref-132" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>
      </ol>
    </section>

  </section>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

  <section id="canto-vi">
    <h3>Canto VI.</h3>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-vi-argument">

      <h4>Argument<br/>
        of the Sixth Canto.</h4>


      <p class="continued">Vasco Da Gama departeth from Melinde; and, while he voyageth
        prosperously, Bacchus descendeth to the sea: Description of Neptune’s
        Palace: The same (Bacchus) convoketh the Sea-gods and persuadeth them
        to destroy the Navigators: Meanwhile Velloso entertaineth his mates
        with the tale of the “Twelve of England”: An horrible storm ariseth:
        It is calmed by Venus and her Nymphs: At length they arrive in calm
        weather at Calecut, the last and longed-for bourne of this navigation.</p>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-vi-another-argument">

      <h4>Another Argument.</h4>

      <blockquote class="poetry italics" lang="pt"><div>

      <p>
        <span>Parte-se de Melinde o illustre Gama,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Com Pilotos da terra, e mantimento:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Desce Lyeo ao mar Neptuno chama</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Todos os deoses do humido elemento:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Conta Velloso, aos seus dando honra, e fama,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Dos doze de Inglaterra o vencimento;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Soccorre Venus a affligida armada,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>E á India chega tanto desejada.</span>
      </p>
    </div></blockquote>

    <table class="table-poetry">
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td>Illustrious Gama from Melindé saileth,</td>
          <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(1–5)</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>With native Pilots and fresh nutriment;</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>Descends Lyæus seaward; Neptune haileth</td>
          <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(6–37)</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>The Gods who rule the humid element:</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>Velloso, giving praise and honour, telleth</td>
          <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(38–69)</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>Of th’ “English Twelve” the Tale of Tournament:</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>Succoureth Venus her long suff’ering Fleet</td>
          <td>(70–91)</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>And thus the wisht-for strand of Inde they greet.</td>
          <td>(92–end)</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-vi-body">
      <h4>Canto VI.</h4>

      <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

      <p>
        <span>Scant could devise how best to entertain<span class="linenum">1</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the pagan King our Voyagers renown’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">firm friendship of the Christian King to gain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and folk so puissant proved, so faithful found:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Grieveth him greatly, that his rule and reign</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">be placed so distant from Europa’s bound</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by lot, nor let him neighbour that abode</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where opened Hercules the broad sea-road.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>With games and dances, gentle, honest play<span class="linenum">2</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">e’en as accorded with Melindan style,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and fishing frolicks, like the Lageian gay<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-133" id="noteref-133">[133]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">delighted Anthony with gladde’ning guile,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">rejoiced that famous Sovran every day,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Lusitanian host to feast and fill</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with banquets rich, rare meats and unknown dishes</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of fruit and flesh, of birds, and beasts, and fishes.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>But when the Captain saw him still detainèd<span class="linenum">3</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_218">[Pg. 218]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">far more than seemèd meet, while the fresh breeze</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to sail inviteth; and he had obtainèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Negro Pilots and the new supplies;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">no longer list he tarry; for remainèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">long paths to plow through salt and silvern seas;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>To the good Pagan bids he warm adieu,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>who prays their friendship may be long and true.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>He prayeth, eke, that Hythe shall ever be<span class="linenum">4</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the place where all the Fleets may rest and bait;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for nothing better now desireth he,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">than for such Barons to quit reign and state:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Eke, that ere light of Life his body flee</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he will on opportunity await</span>
        <br/>
        <span>his days to peril and his crown to waive,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for King so kingly and for Braves so brave.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Response in sim’ilar speech to such discourse<span class="linenum">5</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Captain gave, and loosing canvas sailèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">straight for Auroran regions shaping course,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where his long seeking still so scant availèd.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">No more his Guide and Pilot had recourse</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to fraud and falsehood, nay, he never failèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span>in his sure seamanship; so sped they o’er</span>
        <br/>
        <span>securer seas than those they sail’d before.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>They fought the restless floods that front the Morn<span class="linenum">6</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_219">[Pg. 219]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">now ent’ering Indic Ocean, and descried</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Sol’s chambers, where the burning God is born;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and ev’ery wish was wellnigh satisfied.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">But now that ill Thyoneus’ soul of scorn,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">mourning the mighty meeds of power and pride</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that Lusian valour wendeth dight to win,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>burns and blasphemes with madding rage insane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>He saw the potent hosts of Heav’en prepare<span class="linenum">7</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in Lisbon town a novel Rome t’ instal:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Nor aught can alter; such high fortunes are</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ruled by the dreadful Pow’er that ruleth all.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">In fine he flies Olympus in despair,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to find on earth new mode remedial:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>He thrids the humid Reign and seeks his court</span>
        <br/>
        <span>who gained the Gov’ernance of the Seas by sort.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Deep in the lowest depths of the profound<span class="linenum">8</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and lofty Caves, where surges slumb’ering lie;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">there, whence the billows sally furibund</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when to fierce winds the fiercer waves reply</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">bides Neptune, and abide their Lord around</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Ner’eids, and many a sea-born Deity,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where fit for cities leave the waves a plain</span>
        <br/>
        <span>dry for the Godheads governing the Main.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Discover th’ undiscovered depths of sea<span class="linenum">9</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_220">[Pg. 220]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Courts strewn with gravels of fine silver hoar;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and lofty turrets crown that Ocean-lea,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">chrystalline masses of diaph’anous ore:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">However near the curious eye may be,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">so much its judgment shall be less secure</span>
        <br/>
        <span>an it be chrystal, or the diamant-stone</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that doth such clearness and such radiance own.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>The gates of purest gold, where lies inlaid<span class="linenum">10</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">rich seed of pearl that in the sea-shell breedeth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with rarest shapes of sculpture are portray’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whereon hot Bacchus pleasèd glances feedeth:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">There ’mid the foremost, limned in light and shade,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">old Chaos’ face confus’d the stranger readeth:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the fourfold El’ements eke he sees translate,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>each in his several office and estate.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>There Fire sublimely held supremest height,<span class="linenum">11</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who by no grosser substance was sustainèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lending to living things his life and light,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">since by Prometheus stolen and detainèd.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Behind him, standing high ’yond mortal sight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">invis’ible Air a lower place maintainèd,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Æther, which conquered ne by Heat ne Cold,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>ne’er suff’ereth Earth a vacuous space t’ enfold.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>There deckt with mount and boscage Terra stood<span class="linenum">12</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_221">[Pg. 221]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Yclad in grass, shrub, tree of blossom’d head;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">affording life, affording divers food</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to ev’ery breathing thing her surface bred:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The glassy figure, eke, ensculptur’ed stood</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Water, veining Earth and interspread,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>creating fishes in their varied norm,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and by her humour holding all in form.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Carved on another panel showed the fight,<span class="linenum">13</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">waged by the Gods against the Giantry;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Typhœus lies ’neath Ætna’s serried height,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">far flashing crepitant artillery:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">There sculptured cometh gravid Earth to smite</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Neptune, when taught the salvage Man t’ apply</span>
        <br/>
        <span>his gift, the Courser, and to worlds first shown</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the peaceful Olive-tree, Minerva’s boon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>With scanty tardance vext Lyæus eyed<span class="linenum">14</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">these varied marvels: Soon he past the gate</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Neptune’s Palace, who had thither hied</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the God’s expected visit to await:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Him at the threshold greets he, ’companied</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by Nymphs, who marvel at the freak of Fate</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to see, attempting such unusèd road,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Wine-god seek the Water-god’s abode.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“O Neptune!” crièd he, “Regard not strange<span class="linenum">15</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_222">[Pg. 222]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that Bacchus comes a guest within thy Reign;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">even we highest pow’ers who reck no change</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">are prone to suffer Fortune’s fell disdain:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Summon, I pray, the Gods who Ocean range</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">ere say I more, if more to hear thou deign;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>they shall behold what ills the Gods befall,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>all hear what evils overhang us all.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Already Neptune, deeming worth his heed<span class="linenum">16</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a case so novel, sends in hottest haste,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Triton to call the cold Sea-gods with speed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that govern Ocean’s breadth from east to west:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Triton,—that boasts him of the Sea-king’s seed,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who had the reverend nymph, Salatia, prest,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>was a tall, huge-limb’d Carle, young, swart of hue,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>his Father’s trumpet and his courier too.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>The feltred beard, and matted locks that fell<span class="linenum">17</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">adown his head and o’er his shoulders strown,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">were water-pregnant weeds, and seemed it well</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">no soft’ening comb had e’er their tangles known:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Nor lacketh jet-black fringe of mussel-shell,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">pendent from points where mingled growths are grown:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>For cap and cowl upon his head he wore</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the crusty spoils erst a huge lobster bore.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Naked his body, and of cloth are clear<span class="linenum">18</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_223">[Pg. 223]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his loins, to swim without impediment;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yet pigmy sea-things clothe with sea-born gear</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his limbs, in hundred hundreds spread and sprent;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with shrimps, and crabs, and many such small deer</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which from cool Phœbe take their increment;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>oysters, and moss-fouled mussels, while each rib</span>
        <br/>
        <span>glistens with periwinkles glazed and glib.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>His Conch, that mighty writhèd shell, in hand<span class="linenum">19</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he bore, and forceful blew with draughty throat;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose harsh canorous voice, at his command,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">heard ev’ery Ocean, ech’oing far the note:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now by his summons warned, the god-like band</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">straight for the Palace left their seats, and sought</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Deity who reared Dardania’s wall,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by Grecian fury doomed anon to fall.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Came Father Ocean, whom accompanied<span class="linenum">20</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the sons and daughters gotten in the Main:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Comes Nereus, who led Doris for a bride,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">she who replenisht with her Nymphs his Reign:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And, eke, prophetick Proteus thither hied,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">leaving his herd to browse the bitter plain:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>He came, that wizard; yet right well knew he</span>
        <br/>
        <span>what Father Bacchus wanted of the Sea.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Came from another quarter Neptune’s fere,<span class="linenum">21</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_224">[Pg. 224]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">begot by Cœlus, borne by Vesta’s womb,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of gesture grave yet gay, fair sans compeer,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the wond’ering waves were blandisht by her bloom:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">A light Cymár of costly weft her wear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">subtle as though ’twere wove in airy loom,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that bared the chrystal charms to longing eyne,—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>charms ne’er create in jealous shade to pine:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>And Amphitrité, bright as flow’ers in spring,<span class="linenum">22</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in such conjuncture could not stay away;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">bringing the Dolphin, who her heart did bring</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">her kingly lover’s wish and will t’ obey;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with glorious orbs that conquer ev’erything,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and steal his splendours from the Lord of Day:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Hand clasping hand the coupled Consorts trod</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the sister spouses of the two-wived God.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>She, who from furious Athamas of yore<span class="linenum">23</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a fugitive, uprose to god-degree,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">her son, a lovely youngling, with her bore,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-134" id="noteref-134">[134]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">fated to sit in Heaven’s consistory:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">They linger sporting on the pebbly shore</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with pearly conchlets, which the briny sea</span>
        <br/>
        <span>aye breeds, and now he stays his sport, and rests</span>
        <br/>
        <span>pillow’d on Panope’s delicious breasts.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span class="pagenum" id="Page_225">[Pg 225]</span> <br/>
        <span>And eke the God,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-135" id="noteref-135">[135]</a> once
          made in mould of man,<span class="linenum">24</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who by the magick simples’ potent spell</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">changèd to fish, and from such chance began</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a thing of time ’mid timeless Gods to dwell,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">came still bewailing tricksy Fortune’s ban,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which the fair maid by Circe’s spite befel,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Scylla he lovèd as by her belovèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for love pervert pure hate hath often provèd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>And now the Godheads all in Council meet<span class="linenum">25</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">amid the vasty Hall, superb, divine;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Goddesses seated on rich daïs seat</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Gods throned on tall estrados chrystalline;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when rose their awful Host his guests to greet</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who by the Theban sat on level line:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Fumeth the Palace with the rich sea-mass<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-136" id="noteref-136">[136]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span>Araby’s odours never shall surpass.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>At length, when tumult sinks to stilly rest,<span class="linenum">26</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and when the De’ities all their greetings close,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to them Thyóneus opes his hidden breast,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and the sad secret of his torment shows:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">A shade of sadness marks his look and gest,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as though deprest by sense of ’during woes,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>resolved with alien steel alone to slay</span>
        <br/>
        <span>right soon the Lusus men, he ’gan to say:—</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Prince! who by birthright holdest high command<span class="linenum">27</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_226">[Pg. 226]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">o’er the proud seas that sweep from Pole to Pole;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">thou who dost curb the den’izens of the land</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that none o’erpass his term and certain goal:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And, Father Ocean! thou whose ’circling band</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">around the globèd universe doth roll,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>permitting only by thy just decree</span>
        <br/>
        <span>each in due bounds to flourish, Earth and Sea:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“And, eke, ye Water-gods, who ne’er endure<span class="linenum">28</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">aught of injurious in your vast domain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sans meetest chastisement condign and sure,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">dealt to the worms who overrun your reign:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Why dwell ye reckless thus, how rest secure?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Who to such softness had the power to train</span>
        <br/>
        <span>your hearts, with reason hardened to behold</span>
        <br/>
        <span>this race of mortals weak withal so bold?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Ye saw the wondrous insolent extremes<span class="linenum">29</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that dared the heavenly heights in arms to scale:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Ye saw that wildest phantasy that dreams</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of conquering Ocean-tide with oar and sail:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Ye saw, and every day we see, meseems,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">such braves, such insults that, if these prevail,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>full soon, I fear, of sea and sky to find</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Mankind the godheads, Gods the humankind.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“You see that now this weak ephemeral brood,<span class="linenum">30</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_227">[Pg. 227]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who from a Vassal mine hath taken name,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with sprite high-flown, and heart of proudest mood,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">you, me and all the world would tempt and tame:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">You see how freely they defy your Flood,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a doughtier deed than Rome’s high race could claim:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>You see they seek to ’spy your whole domain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to break the very statutes of your Reign.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“I saw how ’gainst the Minyæ,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-137" id="noteref-137">[137]</a> first to find<span class="linenum">31</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the path that passeth through your realm, the wave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">much-injured Boreas, with his brother-wind</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Aquilo and their peers, did rage and rave.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">If to th’ adventurous mortals who design’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">such wrongs the Winds appaid the boast and brave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>ye, who have higher right these wrongs to pay,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>what wait ye? Doom of justice why delay?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Nor will I, Gods! consent, so should you trow<span class="linenum">32</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">pure love of you from Heaven hath brought me down;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">not thus your suff’ering feel I and your woe,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">what wrongs I now resent are all mine own;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">since the high honours, as your Godships know,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">I won on earth, when fell by me o’erthrown</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Inde’s wealthy Reign, of Morning-lond the grace,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>I see abated by this little race:</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“For our all-Sovran Sire and eke the Fates<span class="linenum">33</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_228">[Pg. 228]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who rule this nether world as best they wot,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">resolve with Fame which ne’er on man awaits,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to make th’ abysmal sea these Barons’ lot:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hence shall you view, O Gods! their human hates</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">teach god to work god wrong: Ah! see ye not</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of note and worth we have the smallest boast</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whose value Reason valueth the most.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Wherefore Olympus’ height I now have fled,<span class="linenum">34</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to seek heart-salving balm for sore despair;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">eke would I find, if rank thus forfeitèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in Heav’en, your Waters still to honour care.”</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">More would he say, but nothing more he said,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for tears, already trickling pair by pair,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>leapt from his brimming lids, and as they came</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Gods of Water felt their sprites aflame.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>The rage which sudden fired their hearts divine,<span class="linenum">35</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and roused to such display each vengeful soul,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">suffered not counsel to contain design,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor discount brookèd, nor endured control:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now to great Æolus they send a sign,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as ’twere from Neptune, bidding him enroll</span>
        <br/>
        <span>contrary Winds of wildest phrenesy,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and of all vent’urous sails sweep clean the sea.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Proteus the first and foremost there desirèd<span class="linenum">36</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_229">[Pg. 229]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to speak his feelings as he felt him bound;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the general Conclave deeming him inspirèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by some myst’erious prophesy profound:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yet was that Company divine so firèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by sudden tumult; brake such storm of sound</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that Tethys rising cries indignantly,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>“Well kens King Neptune what commandeth he.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Now there superb Hippotades<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-138" id="noteref-138">[138]</a> gave vent<span class="linenum">37</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to furious Winds erst pent in prison-hold;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the while his wilful words fresh fury lent,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">against the Lusian Barons brave and bold.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Sudden the summer-vault with clouds was sprent,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for Winds, still growing fierce with rage untold,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>gather as on they go fresh might and main,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>house, tow’er, and hillock strewing o’er the plain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>While thus in Council met the Gods’ array<span class="linenum">38</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">beneath the Seas, before soft breezes float</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our joyous weary Ships, and hold their way</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">o’er tranquil Ocean on the long new route.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The hour was that when hangs the Lamp of Day</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from hemisphere Eöan most remote:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>They of night’s early watch<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-139" id="noteref-139">[139]</a> lay down to sleep,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>while others waked the second ward to keep.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Drows’iness mastered, all half-numbed and chill<span class="linenum">39</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_230">[Pg. 230]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">shivered with many a yawn the huddling Crew</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">beneath the bulging main-sail, clothèd ill</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to bear the nightly breath that keenly blew;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">their eyes, kept open sore against their will,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">they rubbed, and stretcht their torpid limbs anew:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>To seek a waking-draught the men devise,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>spin stories, tell a thousand histories.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>One ’gan to say, “Wherewith may better we<span class="linenum">40</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">spur tardy Time who lags so sore and slow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">save with some pretty tale of joyaunce gay</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that heavy slumber trouble us no mo?”</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Replied Le’onardo, truest lover he,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose firm and constant thought was aye aglow:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>“What tale our tardy breasts may better move</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and kill old Time than some fair Lay of Love?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“’Twere not, methinks,” Velloso said, “thing meet<span class="linenum">41</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on theme so soft in hours so hard to dwell;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the rough Sea-labours, which do fag the fleet,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Love’s delicatest fancies rudely quell:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Rather of fervid fight and battle-feat</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">be now our story, for I see full well,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>life is all hardship, and good sooth I wis</span>
        <br/>
        <span>more trouble cometh; something tells me this.”</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>All with his words consenting joint assail<span class="linenum">42</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_231">[Pg. 231]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Velloso to recount whate’er he knew.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">“I will recount,” quoth he, “nor shall you rail</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">at aught that seemeth fabulous or new:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And that my hearers learn from this my tale</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">high proofs of forceful deed to dare and do,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>e’en of my countrymen I’ll say my say;—</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Twelve of England shall adorn my lay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“When of our Reign the curbing rein so light<span class="linenum">43</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">John, son of Pedro, held with mod’erate hand;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and when his Realm had ’scaped the bane and blight</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">oft dealt by hate of hostile neighbour-land;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">there in great England, where the rain falls white</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from Boreal snow-drift, fierce Erinnys plan’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to sow the dil’igent tares of wanton strife,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and make our Lusitania lustre-rife.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Betwixt the gentle Dames of th’ English Court,<span class="linenum">44</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and high-born Courtier-crowd, one day it came</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that horrid Discord showed her dreadful port;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of self-will sprung, or faith in common fame.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The Courtier-throng that lightly loves in sport</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and careless mood to bruit the gravest shame,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>sware Honour they disprov’d, and Honesty</span>
        <br/>
        <span>in certain Dames, who boasted Dames to be.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Nay, more, if any Knight uphold as true,<span class="linenum">45</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_232">[Pg. 232]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and with his brand and lance the cause defend,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in lists or rasèd field, the same should rue</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">foul infamy, or come to cruel end:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The woman-weakness which but little knew,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">if e’er, such foul reproach, and yet which ken’d</span>
        <br/>
        <span>its want of nat’ural force could only crave</span>
        <br/>
        <span>their friends to succour and their kin to save.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But as their sland’erers great and puissant were<span class="linenum">46</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">throughout the kingdom, none the cause would heed;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor kith, nor friends, nor fervid lovers dare</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">support the Dames in darkest hour of need:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Tempting with delicate tear and doleful air</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the very Gods to rise in arms, and aid</span>
        <br/>
        <span>from Heav’en, for sake of alabaster brows,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to ducal Lancaster<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-140" id="noteref-140">[140]</a> the
          Bevy goes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“This lord was English and in doughty fight<span class="linenum">47</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">against Castile for Portugale made war,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wherein he proved the noble force and sprite</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of his companions, and their fav’ouring star:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Nor less within our realm he saw the might</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Love, whose am’orous feats as forceful are,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when his fair daughter so the heart did win</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of our stout King that chose her for his Queen.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“He who in person succour must withhold,<span class="linenum">48</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_233">[Pg. 233]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lest fire of civil discord thus be fan’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">replied:—‘When I my rights upheld of old</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to Spanish kingdom in th’ Iberian land,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">I saw in Lusia’s sons a soul so bold,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">such primacy of heart, such open hand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that they, and only they, I deem, shall dare</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with brand and firebrand for your case to care.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘And, if, aggrievèd Dames! ye hold it meet<span class="linenum">49</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">I’ll send my Heralds speaking in your name,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">while let your letters, courteous and discreet,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">declare your insult, and bewail your shame.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Eke on your side, with pretty phrases sweet,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and soft caresses, let each injured Dame</span>
        <br/>
        <span>temper her tears, and venture I to say</span>
        <br/>
        <span>you shall strong succour see and steadfast stay.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Thus doth the Duke experienced speak his mind,<span class="linenum">50</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and of his bravest friends twelve names he quotes:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">That suit’able Champion be to each assign’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he wills the namèd Knights be chose by lots;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">because the Dames be twelve; and when they find</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which Brave to which Belle-dame his life devotes,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>each unto each shall write and claim her rights,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>all to their King, the Duke to all the Knights.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“The mess’enger now in Lusia-lond arriveth;<span class="linenum">51</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_234">[Pg. 234]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Court rejoiceth at such novelty:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Our King sublime to ’list the foremost striveth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but suffereth not the kingly dignity:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">No courtier but whose valiant sprite aspireth</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to volunteer with fervid volunty,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and only he high favour’d is proclaimèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whom for such noble feat the Duke hath namèd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“There in the loyal City whence (’tis said<span class="linenum">52</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by olden Fame), arose the name eternal</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Portugalia, a nimble barque he bade</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">be ’quipt, who holds the helm of rule internal.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The Twelve in briefest season ready made</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">arms and accoutrements of use hodiernal;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>helms, crests, and mottoes of choice mode they choose</span>
        <br/>
        <span>horse, selle, and harness of a thousand hues.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Now, when dismissèd by their King had been,<span class="linenum">53</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sail from the Douro regions famed afar,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the luck-loved Twelve, who did th’ approval win</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of England’s Duke experienced in war.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Amid the dozen was no diff’erence seen</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in chivalry, while skill and strength were par;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>then one, Magriço<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-141" id="noteref-141">[141]</a>
          hight, and only he</span>
        <br/>
        <span>this way addrest the doughty company:—</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“‘Valiantest comrades! longings manifold<span class="linenum">54</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_235">[Pg. 235]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">I nurst for many a year the world t’ explore,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Rivers by Tagus nor by Douro roll’d,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">various nations, laws, and varied lore:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And now that matters fit in certain mould</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">(since Earth of marvels hath extended store),</span>
        <br/>
        <span>I would, an leave ye give, alone go round</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by land, and meet you upon English ground.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“‘And, should I haply ’counter let or stay,<span class="linenum">55</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from Him who holds of things the ultime line,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and fail to find you on our trysting day,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">scant fault to you shall bring default of mine.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">You all shall do my duty in the fray;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but, an my prescient sprite the Truth divine,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>ne stream, ne mount, ne jealous Fate hath pow’er</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to nill I hail you at th’ appointed hour.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Thus spake Magriço and, his friends embracèd,<span class="linenum">56</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he fareth forwards when their leave was tane:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">In Leon and Castile’s old realms he tracèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sites patrial Mars had granted us to gain:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Navarre and all the dang’erous heads he facèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Pyrenee departing Gaul from Spain;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and, seen of France the highest scenes and best,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>in Flanders’ grand emporium<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-142" id="noteref-142">[142]</a> took his rest.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“There halting, or by chance or whim’s command,<span class="linenum">57</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_236">[Pg. 236]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for days he tarried, making much delay:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Meanwhile the stout Elev’en, a glorious band,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">plow northern waters scatt’ering freezy spray.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Arrived on stranger England’s distant strand,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">at once to London-town all took the way:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>The Duke receives them in his festive hall,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Dames do service, greeting one and all.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Now Time and Tide are ready for the fight<span class="linenum">58</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with th’ English Twelve who first afield are shown,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">chose by their King, right sure of every Knight:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Helms, crests, greaves, coats, and harnesses they don:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The Dames already deem the fulgent might</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Portugalia’s Mavors all their own:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>In golden owche and rainbow-silks clad</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and thousand jewels, sit they gay and glad.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“But she, who claimèd by the chance of lot,<span class="linenum">59</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">missing Magriço, drest in mourning dyes</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sits sad; for she and only she hath not</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a knightly champion in this high emprize:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Though our Elev’en proclaimèd on the spot,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to England’s Court, of battle such assize,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that mote the Dames their cause victorious call,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>though of their champions two or three may fall.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Now in the lofty publick Lists convene,<span class="linenum">60</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_237">[Pg. 237]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the King of England and his suite and Court:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">In threes by threes, and fours by fours are seen</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">spectators rangèd by the rule of sort.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">From Tage to Bactrus<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-143" id="noteref-143">[143]</a> ne’er did Sol, I ween,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">flame on such force and fierceness, power and port,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as on those English Twelve, who leave their walls</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to front Eleven of our Portingalls.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Champing their golden bits, fleckt spumy white,<span class="linenum">61</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the chargers cast fierce fiery looks askance:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">On arms and armour Phœbus danceth bright</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as on dure adamant or chrystal glance:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Not less on either side astound the sight</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">numbers unequal, a quaint dissonance,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to twelve eleven matched: Begins the crowd</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to vent its general joyaunce long and loud.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“All turn their faces curious to see<span class="linenum">62</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where loudest bruit and hottest bate arise:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">When lo! a horseman, armèd cap-à-pie,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">pricks o’er the plain to claim of war the prize:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Saluting King and Dames, straight rideth he</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to his Eleven: ’Tis the great Magriçe:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>With warmest accolade his friends he haileth,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whom in the battle, certès, ne’er he faileth.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“The Ladye, hearing that the man was there,<span class="linenum">63</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_238">[Pg. 238]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who would in combat guard her name and fame,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wends glad the fleece of Helle’s beast to wear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which more than Virtue vulgar hearts doth claim:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">They cry, ‘Let go!’ and now the trump’s shrill blare</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">fireth the warrior-heart with fiercer flame:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>All prick at once the spur, all slack the bit,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>all couch the lances; earth by fire is lit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“The tramp of destr’iers riseth with a noise<span class="linenum">64</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as though some quake of earth rolled ’neath their tread:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Heart-strings in bosoms flutter; gazing eyes</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">are fixt in mingled sense of joy and dread:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">This, from his charger not dismounting flies;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that groaneth falling with his falling steed;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>this hath his snow-white mail with vermeil dyed;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that, with his helm-plume flogs his courser’s side.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Some sleep to wake no more, in lasting swoon<span class="linenum">65</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">passing from life to death with hasty course:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Horses sans riders here o’er tilt-yard run,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and there the rider runs without the horse:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now falleth English pride from off her throne;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for two or three depart the Pale parforce,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>while they the battle-brand who came to wield,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>find more than harness holds, or mail, or shield.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“To waste long words and War’s extremes to show<span class="linenum">66</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_239">[Pg. 239]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of slashing cuts, and thrusts of cruel pain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">were work of wastrel-men who, well we trow,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of leisure lavish, vainest dream’ery feign:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Let it in fine suffice that all ye know</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">how with the fame of high finesse, remain</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Victory’s palms with us; and ev’ery Dame</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a glorious victress, did retrieve her fame.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“The Duke our conqu’ering Twelve forthwith invites<span class="linenum">67</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where ring his halls with feast and wassail gay:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Hunters and kitcheners to toil incites</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of the Twelve Dames that goodly company;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">who glad had lavisht on their saviour Knights</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a thousand banquets ev’ery hour o’ the day,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>long as on English-land they list to roam,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>before returning to the dear-loved home.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Withal, the great Magriço, men declare,<span class="linenum">68</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wishing the Wonders of the World to view,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">abroad remainèd and performèd there</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for Flanders’ Countess not’able service true:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And be’ing no carpet-knight, but prompt to dare</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">what exploits, Mars! thou biddest man to do</span>
        <br/>
        <span>He slew a Frank in field; and thus had he</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Torquatus’ and Corvinus’ destiny.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Of the stout Twelve another cast his lot<span class="linenum">69</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_240">[Pg. 240]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in Almayne, where him fiercely challengèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">a wily German, who had planned such plot</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his life depended from a single thread.”</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Velloso ceasing here, his mates besought</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he would not leave the glorious tale unsaid</span>
        <br/>
        <span>anent Magriço, and the meed he met,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>nor e’en the caitiff German Knight forget.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>But at this passage when each prickt his ear,<span class="linenum">70</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">behold! the Master conning sky and cloud,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">pipeth his whistle; waken as they hear</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">starboard and larboard all the startled crowd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">And, as the breeze blew fresh’ening shrill and sheer,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">he bade them take in topsails shouting loud</span>
        <br/>
        <span>“Yarely, my lads! look out, the wind increases</span>
        <br/>
        <span>from yon black thunder-cloud before our faces.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Scarce were the foresails hurr’iedly taken in,<span class="linenum">71</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when sharp and sudden bursts the roaring gale:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">“Furl!” cried the Master with as loud a din,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">“Furl!” cried he, “Furl for life the mainmast-sail!”</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The furious gusts wait not till they begin</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">furling the canvas; but conjoint assail</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and tear it with such crash to shreds and tatters</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as though a ruined world the Storm-wind shatters.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Meanwhile the Crew with cries the welkin tore,<span class="linenum">72</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_241">[Pg. 241]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in panick fear and gen’eral disaccord;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for as the canvas split, the hull heel’d o’er,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">broad sheets of water shipping by the board.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">“Heave!” roared the Master with a mighty roar,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">“Heave overboard your all, tog’ether’s the word!</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Others go work the pumps, and with a will:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>The pumps! and sharp, look sharp, before she fill!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Hurrieth to ply the pumps the soldier-host,<span class="linenum">73</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but ere they reachèd them, the rolling sea</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and tem’erous waves the ship so pitcht and tost,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">all lost their footing falling to the lee.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Three stalwart sailors who best thews could boast,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">sufficèd not to make the helm work free;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>tackles to starboard, yokes to port they lashèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>yet all their pow’er and practice stood abashèd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Such were the gale-gusts, never Tempest blew<span class="linenum">74</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">with more of cruel will, of feller stowre,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">as though its mission were t’ uproot and strew</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on plain of Babel, Babel’s tallest tow’er:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’Mid the great washing waves that greater grew,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">dwindled the puissant Ship to stature lower</span>
        <br/>
        <span>than her own cock; and ’twas a thing of fear,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>seeing her in such surges swim and steer.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>The sturdy craft that Paul da Gama bears,<span class="linenum">75</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_242">[Pg. 242]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">beareth her mainmast broken clean in twain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and well-nigh water-logged: The crew in prayers,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">calls upon Him who came to ransom men.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Nor less vain clamours to the empty airs</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Coelho’s vessel casts by fear o’ertane;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>though there the Master had more caution shown,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>furling his canvas ere the storm came down.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>In air the Ships are thrown with ev’ery throw<span class="linenum">76</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of furious Neptune’s crests that kissed the cloud:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Anon appeared the keels to settle low</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">where horrid Glooms the deep sea bowels shroud.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">While Notus, Auster, Boreas, Aquilo</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the world-machine to wreck and ruin crowd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Gleamèd and glarèd pitchy hideous night</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with Leven burning all the polar height.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>The Halcyon birds their melancholy wail<span class="linenum">77</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">piped, as they cowered on the salvage shore;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">remembering aye the wrongful long-past tale</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of woes the waters wrought to them of yore:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Meanwhile th’enamoured Dolphins fled the gale</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to shelt’ering grottos in the deep-sea floor,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>although the mighty winds and mightier waves</span>
        <br/>
        <span>threatenèd danger in their deepest caves.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Ne’er forged such lightning-bolts of living fire<span class="linenum">78</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_243">[Pg. 243]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">against the Giants’ haught rebellious band,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the great toil-sordid Blacksmith, in desire</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to grace with radiant arms his stepson’s hand.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Never was known the mighty Thunderer’s ire</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to rain such fulm’inant fulgor o’er the land</span>
        <br/>
        <span>in the great Deluge, which alone withstood</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the pair that changèd stones to flesh and blood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>How many mountains levelled with the lea<span class="linenum">79</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">those Waves that burst and brake with awful might!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">How many a gnarlèd trunk of ancient tree</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the Winds uptore with wild and wilful spite!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Ne’er reckt those bulky cable-roots to see</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">their heels upturned to meet the heav’enly light;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>nor thought the deep-laid sands that floods could flow</span>
        <br/>
        <span>so fierce, and raise aloft what lay below.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Da Gama, seeing that so near the scope<span class="linenum">80</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of his long voyage, ev’ery chance had failèd;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">seeing the seas to depths infernal ope,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">then with redoubled rage the Lift assailèd:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">By nat’ural Fear confused, and sans a hope</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Life, where nought of heart or art availèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to that high Puissance, and that certain Aid</span>
        <br/>
        <span>which makes th’ imposs’ible possible, thus pray’d:—</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>“Celestial Guard! divine, angelical<span class="linenum">81</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_244">[Pg. 244]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of Skies and Earth and Sea sole Suzerain;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thou, who didst lead Thy people Israël</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">thro’ Erythrean waters cleft in twain:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thou, who didst fain defend thy servant Paul</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">from sandy Syrtes and the monstrous Main,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Who deign’edst the second Sire and children save</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to fill the regions emptied by the Wave:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“If through new perilous paths a way I wore<span class="linenum">82</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">through other Scyllas and Charybdes came,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Saw other Syrtes reef the sandy floor,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">other Acroceraunian rocks infame:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Why, when such labours are wellnigh no more,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">why are we thus abandoned, left to shame,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>if by our travails Thou be not offended</span>
        <br/>
        <span>Nay, if Thy greater glory be intended?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Oh happy they whose hap it was to die<span class="linenum">83</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on grided points of lances African;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to fall, while striving still to bear on high</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">our Holy Faith in regions Mauritan!</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Whose feats illustrious live in ear and eye,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whose mem’ories aye shall haunt the heart of man;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whose Lives by ending life win living name,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>whose Deaths are sweeten’d by a deathless Fame!”</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Thus he, while battling Winds still fiercer clashèd,<span class="linenum">84</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_245">[Pg. 245]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">like raging Bulls indomitably wood;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to greater rage the raging gale was lashèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">hissing and howling through the twiney shroud:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The lightnings’ dreadful night-light brighter flashèd,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and fearful thunders rolled and rent the cloud,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as though the Heavens to Earth unaxled fell,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and the four Elements in battle mell.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>But now the lovely Star<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-144" id="noteref-144">[144]</a> with sparkling ray,<span class="linenum">85</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">led forth clear Sol in Eastern hemisphere;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Day’s lovely Herald hasting to display</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">her gladdening brow, and Earth and Sea to cheer:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The Goddess-ruler of its skyey way,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whom faulchion-girt Orion flies in fear</span>
        <br/>
        <span>when seen the billows and her dear-loved Fleet</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with equal anger and with fear was smit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Here, certès, Bacchus’ handwork I descry,”<span class="linenum">86</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">quoth she, “but Fortune ne’er shall gar him gain</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">his wicked object, nor shall ’scape mine eye</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the damn’d intention which he plans in vain.”</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thus she; and slipping instant from the sky</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">lightly she ’lighteth on the spacious Main,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>bidding her Nymphs to wear as on she sped</span>
        <br/>
        <span>a rosy garland on each golden head.</span>
        </p>
<p>
<span>Garlands she bade them wear of varied hue,<span class="linenum">87</span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_246">[Pg. 246]</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on blondest tresses of the purest shine:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Who had not said the ruddy florets grew</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">on nat’ural gold, which Love had loved to ’twine?</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">To tame and blandish by the charming view</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the noisome crew of Winds, she doth design</span>
        <br/>
        <span>her galaxy of Nymphs, a train as fair</span>
        <br/>
        <span>as Planets dancing on the plains of air.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>And thus it was: For when in Beauty’s pride<span class="linenum">88</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">showed the fair Bevy, faded straight away</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the force wherewith each windy Warrior vied,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and all surrender’d happy to obey:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">It seemed their mighty feet and hands were tied</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by hanks of hair that dimmed the leven-ray;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>meanwhile her Boreas, she who ruled his breast,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>loveliest Orithyia, thus addrest:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>“Think not, fere Boreas! e’er ’twas thought of mine<span class="linenum">89</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">that thou hast lovèd me with constant love;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for gentle ways be Love’s securest sign;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wrath has no power the lover’s heart to move:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">See, an thou bridle not that rage indign,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">expect no grace of me, whom ’twill behove</span>
        <br/>
        <span>henceforth to murther Love by deadly Fear;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>for Love is terror when Fear draweth near.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span class="pagenum" id="Page_247">[Pg 247]</span> <span>Bespake fair Galatéa in
          such
          strain<span class="linenum">90</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">her furious Notus; for she wots right well</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">long in her presence pleasure he had tane,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and now she feeleth he must feel her spell.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">The Salvage scarcely can his joy contain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">nor will his heart within his bosom dwell;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>o’erjoyed to view his Dame vouchsafe command,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>he deems ’tis little to wax soft and bland.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Thus eke had others equal pow’er to tame<span class="linenum">91</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">those other lovers who their hests obey’d;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">yielding to Venus every Wind became</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">tranquil of semblance by new softness sway’d:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">She promised, seen their loves her aidance claim,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in Love’s sweet wars her sempiternal aid;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>and took their homage on her beauteous hands,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>to bear, while sail the Ships, her dear commands.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Now splendid Morning tipt the hills with red<span class="linenum">92</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whence rolls the Gange his sacred sounding tide,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when seamen percht upon the topmast head</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Highlands far rising o’er the prows descried:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-145" id="noteref-145">[145]</a></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Now, ’scaped the tempest and the first sea-dread,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">fled from each bosom terrors vain, and cried</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the Melindanian Pilot in delight,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>“Calecut-land, if aught I see aright!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span class="pagenum" id="Page_248">[Pg 248]</span> <span>“This is, pardie, the very
          Land of Inde,<span class="linenum">93</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">what realms you seek behold! ahead appear;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and if no farther Earth ye long to find,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">your long-drawn travail finds its limit here.”</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">No more the Gama could compose his mind</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for joy to see that Inde is known and near;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>with knees on deck and hands to Heav’en upraisèd</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the God who gave such gift of grace he praisèd:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Praise to his God he gave, and rightly gave,<span class="linenum">94</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">for he not only to that Bourne was brought</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wherefore such perils he and his did brave,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">wherefore with toil and moil so sore he fought;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">but more, because so barely ’scaped the grave</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">when raging Ocean death for him had wrought</span>
        <br/>
        <span>by the dure fervid Winds’ terrifick might,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>he was like one who wakes from dream of fright.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>Amid such fierce extremes of Fear and Pain,<span class="linenum">95</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">such grievous labours, perils lacking name,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">whoso fair Honour wooeth aye shall gain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Man’s true nobility, immortal Fame:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Not those who ever lean on antient strain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">imping on noble trunk a barren claim,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>not those reclining on the golden beds,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>where Moscow’s Zebelin downy softness spreads:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span class="pagenum" id="Page_249">[Pg 249]</span> <span>Not with the novel viands
          exquisite,<span class="linenum">96</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">not with the languid wanton promenade,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">not with the pleasures varied infinite,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which gen’erous souls effeminate, degrade:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Not with the never-conquer’d appetite,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by Fortune pamper’d as by Fortune made,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>that suffers none to change and seek the meed</span>
        <br/>
        <span>of Valour, daring some heroick Deed:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>But by the doughty arm and sword that chase<span class="linenum">97</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Honour which man may proudly hail his own;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">in weary vigil, in the steely case,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">’mid wrathsome winds and bitter billows thrown,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">suff’ering the frigid rigours in th’ embrace</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">of South, and regions lorn, and lere, and lone;</span>
        <br/>
        <span>swall’owing the tainted rations’ scanty dole,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>salted with toil of body, moil of soul:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span>The face enforcing when the cheek would pale<span class="linenum">98</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to wear assurèd aspect glad and fain;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and meet the red-hot balls, whose whistling hail</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">spreads comrades’ arms and legs on battle-plain.</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Thus honour’d hardness shall the heart prevail,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">to scoff at honours and vile gold disdain,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>the gold, the honours often forged by Chance,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>no Valour gained, no Virtue shall enhance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
        <span class="pagenum" id="Page_250">[Pg 250]</span> <span>Thus wax our mortal wits
          immortal bright<span class="linenum">99</span></span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">by long Experience led, Man’s truest guide;</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">and thus the soul shall see, from heavenly height,</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">the maze of human pettiness and pride:</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">Whoso shall rule his life by Reason-light</span>
        <br/>
        <span class="i2">which feeble Passion ne’er hath power to hide,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>shall rise (as rise he ought) to <span class="allsmcap">HONOUR</span>
          true,</span>
        <br/>
        <span>maugre his will that ne’er hath stoop’d to sue.</span>
      </p>
      </div></blockquote>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

    <section id="canto-vi-endnotes">
      <h4>Canto VI. Endnotes.</h4>

      <ol start="133">

      <li id="note-133"><p>Cleopatra. <a href="#noteref-133" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-134"><p>Ino and Melicerta (Leucothea and Palæmon). <a href="#noteref-134" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-135"><p>Glaucus, the fisherman. <a href="#noteref-135" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-136"><p>Ambergris. <a href="#noteref-136" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-137"><p>The Argonauts. <a href="#noteref-137" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-138"><p>Æolus. <a href="#noteref-138" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-139"><p><i lang="pt">Quarto da prima</i> = 6 to 9 p.m. <a href="#noteref-139" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-140"><p>John of Gaunt. <a href="#noteref-140" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-141"><p>= Macrinus, the “little lean one.” <a href="#noteref-141" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-142"><p>Bruges. <a href="#noteref-142" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-143"><p>River of Bactria. <a href="#noteref-143" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-144"><p>Venus rises, the storm falls, and India appears. <a href="#noteref-144" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>

      <li id="note-145"><p>Mount Delli, near Cananor. <a href="#noteref-145" class="pginternal">↩</a></p></li>
      </ol>
    </section>
  </section><section id="canto-vii">
    <h2>Canto VII.</h2>

    <section id="canto-vii-argument">
      <h3>Argument<br>
        of the Seventh Canto.</h3>


      <p>On the occasion of the famous Discovery of India, a notable and
        poetic Exhortation is addrest to the Princes of Christendom, arousing
        them to like Enterprizes: Description of the Reign of Malabar
        wherein lieth the Empire of Calecut, at whose Port the Armada
        anchoreth: Appeareth the Moor Monsaydé who giveth information
        to the Gama and eke instructeth him concerning the natives of
        the land: The Catual, or Governor of Calecut, fareth to see the
        Fleet.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="canto-vii-another-argument">

      <h3>Another Argument.</h3>

      <blockquote class="poetry italics" lang="pt"><div>
        <p>
          <span>Dá fundo a frota a Calecut chegada;</span>
          <br>
          <span>Manda-se mensageiro ao Rei potente;</span>
          <br>
          <span>Chega Monçaide a ver a Lusa armada,</span>
          <br>
          <span>E da Provincia informa largamente:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Faz Gama ao Samori sua embaixada;</span>
          <br>
          <span>He recebido bem da Indica gente:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Co’o Regedor o Mouro ao mar se torna,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Que de toldos e flammulas se adorna.</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>

      <table class="table-poetry">
        <tbody>
          <tr>
            <td>Anchors, to Calecut safe come, the Fleet;</td>
            <td>(1–22)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Sent to its puissant King an Envoy goes;</td>
            <td>(23–27)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Monsaydé comes the Lusian ships to greet,</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(28–41)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>And of the Province telleth all he knows:</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>The Gama fares the Samori to meet;</td>
            <td>(42–65)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Grace to the stranger th’ Indic people shows:</td>
            <td>(66–72)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Then joint the Regent and the Moorman hie</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(73–end)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Aboard, where many a flag and awning fly.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>
    </section>

    <section id="canto-vii-body">

      <h3>Canto VII.</h3>

      <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

        <p>
          <span>And now th’ Armada near’d the Morning-land,<span class="linenum">1</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">many so much desirèd to have seen,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Reigns by those Indic currents moated, and</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by Gange who dwelleth in the sky terrene.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Up Braves! and at them, an your valiant hand,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to snatch victorious Palms determined bene</span>
          <br>
          <span>Here ends your warfare; here before you lies</span>
          <br>
          <span>the realm of riches and your rightful prize.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>To you, O race from Lusus sprung! I say,<span class="linenum">2</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to whom such puny part of Earth is dole’d</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">nay, what say I of Earth, but of His sway</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who ruleth all the rounded skies enfold?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">You, whom ne dangers dure ne dire dismay</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from conqu’ering brutal Heathenesse withhold,</span>
          <br>
          <span>but eke no greed of gain may wean from love</span>
          <br>
          <span>of Mother-essence<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-1" id="noteref-1">[1]</a> throned the
            Heavens above.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_256">[Pg 256]</span> Ye, Portingalls! as forceful as ye’re few,<span class="linenum">3</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who e’er disdain to weigh your weakly weight;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ye, who at cost of various deaths be true</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Laws of Life Eternal to dilate:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Cast by the heav’enly lots your lot ye drew,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">however poor or mean your mundane state,</span>
          <br>
          <span>great deeds for Holy Christendom to show:</span>
          <br>
          <span>So high, O <span class="smcap">Christ</span>! exaltest Thou the low!</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>See them, those Germans, stiff-neckt, herd-like horde<span class="linenum">4</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who browse the pastures of such wide extent,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to him rebellious who hath Peter’s ward,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">choose a new Shepherd, a new Sect invent:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See them absorbed in ugly wars abhor’d</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">(nor yet with blinded errant ways content!)</span>
          <br>
          <span>fight, not the haught tyrannick Othoman,</span>
          <br>
          <span>but th’ apostolick yoke they fain unspan.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>See the hard Englander<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-2" id="noteref-2">[2]</a>
            proclaim his right<span class="linenum">5</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of that old Sacred City King to be,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where reigns and rules the base-born Ishmaelite</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">(Honour of Truth so nude who e’er did see!);</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’mid Boreal snows he taketh sad delight</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to mould new mode of old Christianity:</span>
          <br>
          <span>For those of <span class="smcap">Christ</span> he bares the ready brand,</span>
          <br>
          <span>not to rethrone Lord <span class="smcap">Christ</span> in Holy Land.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_257">[Pg 257]</span> Holds for himself meanwhile a faithless
            Roy,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-3" id="noteref-3">[3]</a><span class="linenum">6</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Jerus’alem City, the terrestrial;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who holds not holy law, but dares defy</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Jerus’alem City, the celestial.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Then what of thee, vile Gaul<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-4" id="noteref-4">[4]</a> what
            need say I?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who wouldst thy vaunting self “Most Christian” call,</span>
          <br>
          <span>not that such title wouldest ward and guard,</span>
          <br>
          <span>but that the name thro’ thee be smircht and mar’d!</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Thy claim to conquer Christian lands beseems<span class="linenum">7</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">one who so much and such fair land doth claim?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">why seek not Cinyps<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-5" id="noteref-5">[5]</a>
            and the Nilus, streams</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which ever hate that ántique Holy Name?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">There should they feel of steel the hard extremes,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who would the Church’s truthful song defame:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Of Charles, of Louis,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-6" id="noteref-6">[6]</a> name
            thou didst inherit</span>
          <br>
          <span>and lands;—why not of justest wars the merit?</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>What shall I say of those who ’mid delights,<span class="linenum">8</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which vilest Idlesse bare for manhood’s bane,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">spend life and love to waste the gold that blights,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and clean forget their antient valiant strain?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Tyrannick best to hostile act incites,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which virile races view as foulest stain:</span>
          <br>
          <span>To thee I speak, O It’aly! sunk by curse</span>
          <br>
          <span>of thousand sins, who dost thyself adverse.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_258">[Pg 258]</span> Ah, wretched Christians, who such cross incur,<span class="linenum">9</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">be you perchance the teeth by Cadmus sown,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that waste of brother-blood ye thus prefer</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when all by self-same mother-womb are grown?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">How durst you see yon Holy Sepulture</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">owned by the bandogs who such feuds disown,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who come to hold and have your antient ground,</span>
          <br>
          <span>their warlike prowess making them renown’d?</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Ye know ’tis now their usance and decree,<span class="linenum">10</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whereof they are observantists entire,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to levy restless hosts of Heathenry,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and harm the hearts that dear <span class="smcap">Christ’s</span> love
            desire:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">While fierce Alecto ’mid your chivalry</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for ever soweth tares of wrath and ire:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Look! an your eyes to risks like these ye close,</span>
          <br>
          <span>how they and you to you be deadliest foes.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>If lust of lucre and of lordship led<span class="linenum">11</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">your course to conquer far and foreign lands,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">see you not Hermus and Pactólus shed</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">adown their fertile valleys aureate sands?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Assyria, Lydia, spin the golden thread,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">lurk veins of sheeny ore in Africk strand:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Let these rich treasures sluggish sprites arouse</span>
          <br>
          <span>since rouse you not the rights of Holy House.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_259">[Pg 259]</span> Those fierce projectiles, of our days the work,<span class="linenum">12</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">murtherous engines, dire artilleries,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">against Byzantine walls, where dwells the Turk,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">should long before have belcht their batteries.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Oh, hurl it back in forest-caves to lurk</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where Caspian crests and steppes of Scythia freeze,</span>
          <br>
          <span>that Turkish ogre-prog’eny multiplied</span>
          <br>
          <span>by op’ulent Europe’s policy and pride.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-7" id="noteref-7">[7]</a></span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span>Georgians, Armenians, Grecians, hapless Thrace<span class="linenum">13</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">cry on your name to quell th’ unspeakable horde</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that dooms parforce their darlings to embrace</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Alcoran’s precepts (tax of blood abhor’d!):</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Prove, when you punish yon inhuman race,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Sage’s spirit and the Soldier’s sword;</span>
          <br>
          <span>nor covet arr’ogant praise and vainest boast</span>
          <br>
          <span>of vaunting valour o’er a brother-host.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But while ye blindly thirst to drink the blood<span class="linenum">14</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of your own veins, Oh hapless Race insane!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">never hath failèd Christian hardihood</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in this our little household Lusitane:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Her seats are set by Africk’s salty flood;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">she holds in Asian realms the largest Reign;</span>
          <br>
          <span>She sows and ears o’er all the Fourth new-found;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and there would hasten had but Earth more ground.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_260">[Pg 260]</span> Meanwhile behold we what new chance befel<span class="linenum">15</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the seld-seen Voyagers who Fame would earn,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Since gentle Venus deigned the gale to quell,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and futile furies of fierce winds to spurn;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when they the large-spread Land’s appearance hail,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of stubborn obst’inate toil the bound and bourne,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and where the Saviour’s seed they wend to sow,</span>
          <br>
          <span>enthrone new lords, new lights, new laws bestow.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Soon as along the stranger-shores they lay,<span class="linenum">16</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a fragile fleet that fishing people bare</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they found, and by such guidance learnt the way</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to Calecut, whose denizens they were:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thither inclined the Prores without delay;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for ’twas the City fairest ’mid the fair</span>
          <br>
          <span>in land of Malabar and where abode</span>
          <br>
          <span>the King, whose orders all that Region owe’d.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Outside of Indus, inside Ganges, lies<span class="linenum">17</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a wide-spread country famed enough of yore;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">northward the peaks of caved Emódus<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-8" id="noteref-8">[8]</a>
            rise,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and southward Ocean doth confine the shore:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">She bears the yoke of various sovranties</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and various eke her creeds: While these adore</span>
          <br>
          <span>vicious Mafóma, those to stock and stone</span>
          <br>
          <span>bow down, and eke to brutes among them grown.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_261">[Pg 261]</span> There, deep i’ the mighty Range, that doth
            divide<span class="linenum">18</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the land, and cutteth Asian continent,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose crests are known by names diversified,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of ev’ry country where its trend is bent;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">outburst the fountains, which commingling glide</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in pow’erful streams, that die when travel-spent</span>
          <br>
          <span>in Indic Ocean, and the arms of these</span>
          <br>
          <span>convert the country to a Chersonèse:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Twixt either river from this breadth of base<span class="linenum">19</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">puts forth the spacious land a long thin horn,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">quasi-pyramidal, which in th’ embrace</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Ocean lies with Isle Ceylón toforn:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">And, near the source that shows the natal place</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Gange, if olden Fame of Truth be born,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the happy Peoples of th’ adjacent bowers,</span>
          <br>
          <span>feed on the fragrance of the finest flowers;</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But now of many usance, mode and name<span class="linenum">20</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">are all the tribes who have and hold the ground;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Pathans and Delhis urge the proudest claim</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to land and numbers, for they most abound:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Deccanis, Oriás, who both misclaim</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">salvation in the sounding flood is found</span>
          <br>
          <span>by Ganges rolled; and here the land Bengal</span>
          <br>
          <span>is rich in sort her wealth exceedeth all.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_262">[Pg 262]</span> The sovranty of bellicose Cambay,<span class="linenum">21</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">(men say ’twas puissant Porus’ olden reign);</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Narsinga’s Kingdom, with her rich display</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of gold and gems but poor in martial vein:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here seen yonside where wavy waters play</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a range of mountains skirts the murmuring Main,</span>
          <br>
          <span>serving the Malabar for mighty mure,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who thus from him of Canará dwells secure.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The country-people call this range the Ghaut,<span class="linenum">22</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and from its foot-hills scanty breadth there be</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose seaward-sloping coast-plain long hath fought</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’gainst Ocean’s natural ferocity:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here o’er her neighbour Cities, sans a doubt,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Calecut claimeth highest dignity,</span>
          <br>
          <span>crown of the kingdom fair and flourishing:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Here he entitled “Samorim”<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-9" id="noteref-9">[9]</a> is King.</span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span>Arrived the Squadron off that wealthy land,<span class="linenum">23</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">she sent a Portingall to make report,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">so mote the Géntoo monarch understand</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who hath arrivèd in his distant port:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">A stream the Herald struck which, leaving land</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">entereth Ocean; and his novel sort,</span>
          <br>
          <span>his hue, his strange attire, his stranger-ways</span>
          <br>
          <span>made all the lieges gather round to gaze.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_263">[Pg 263]</span> Amid the swarming rout that thronged to view,<span class="linenum">24</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">cometh a Moslem, who was born and bred</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in distant Barb’ary ’mid her barbarous crew,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">there, where in antient day Antæus sway’d:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Right well the Lusitanian realm he knew,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">or by the scanty distance thither led,</span>
          <br>
          <span>or ’signèd by the Sword and Fortune’s brand,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to long-drawn exile in a foreign land.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>With jocund mien our Messenger to sound,<span class="linenum">25</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for-that he speaketh well the speech of Spain,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he thus:—“Who brought thee to this new world’s bound,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">far from thy Fatherland, the Lusitan?”</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“Op’ening,” respondeth he, “the seas profound</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which never openèd the race of man;</span>
          <br>
          <span>for Indus’ mighty flood we hither bore,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to win for Holy Faith one triumph more.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>By the long voyage sore astonied stood<span class="linenum">26</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Moor Monsaydé, thus his name was known;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when told the Lusian how the terr’ible flood</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">had all the temper of a tyrant shown:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But, as that errand’s drift, he understood,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">concern’d the Ruler of the Land alone,</span>
          <br>
          <span>he tells the stranger how the Monarch lay</span>
          <br>
          <span>outside the city at a little way:</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_264">[Pg 264]</span> And that while travelled to the royal ear<span class="linenum">27</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">news of that advent strange, if judged he meet,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">repairing to his humble dwelling near,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’twere well refreshment of the land to eat;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whence by short rest restorèd and good cheer,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the twain together might regain the Fleet;</span>
          <br>
          <span>for life has nothing like the joy and glee</span>
          <br>
          <span>wherewith near neighbours meet in far countrie.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The Portingall, accepting not ingrate<span class="linenum">28</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">what glad Monsaydé for his guest deviseth;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as though their friendship were of olden date,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">eats, drinks, and does whate’er the host adviseth:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Now from the City wend they, making straight</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">towards the Squadron which the Moor agniseth;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and scale the Flagship’s flank, where all the crew</span>
          <br>
          <span>with kindly glances Moor Monsaydé view.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Embraceth him our Chief, whom hugely please<span class="linenum">29</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the well-remembered accents of Castile;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">seateth him near, and asketh him at ease</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">anent the land and folk therein that dwell.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Even as flockt on Rhodopé the trees,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to hear the Lover of the Damosel</span>
          <br>
          <span>Eurydice, his lyre of gold resound,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Folk to hearken flockt the Moor around.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_265">[Pg 265]</span> Then he: “O Nation! who by Nature’s hand<span class="linenum">30</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">was ’stablished neighbour to my natal nide,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">what mighty Chance, what Destiny’s command</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">upon such voyage drave you far and wide?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Not causeless, no; though darkly, deeply plan’d</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from unknown Minho, distant Tagus-tide,</span>
          <br>
          <span>your course o’er Oceans aye by keel unplow’d</span>
          <br>
          <span>to Reigns such distance and such dangers shroud.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“God bringeth you, pardie! for He intendeth<span class="linenum">31</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">some special service which your works await:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">For this alone He guideth and defendeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from en’emies, Ocean and the winds’ wild hate.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Know, that ye look on Inde wherein extendeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a world of nations, rich and fortunate</span>
          <br>
          <span>in lucent gold, and gems of princely price,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and odorif’erous fumes and biting spice.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“This Province, in whose Port your ships have tane<span class="linenum">32</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">refuge, the Malabar by name is known;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">its ántique rite adoreth idols vain,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Idol-religion being broadest sown:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Of divers Kings it is; but ’twas the Reign,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as olden legend saith, of only one,</span>
          <br>
          <span>hight the last King was Sarmá Perimal,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-10" id="noteref-10">[10]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span>who ’neath one sceptre held the Kingdom all.</span>
</p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_266">[Pg 266]</span> “But as this region there and then was sought<span class="linenum">33</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by other races from the Arab Bight,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who Mahometic worship with them brought,—</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the same my parents planted in my sprite,—</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">it hapt their wisdom and their pray’ers so wrought</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">upon the Perimal; and lit such light</span>
          <br>
          <span>that to the Faith convert with fervour high,</span>
          <br>
          <span>he only hoped a Saint in it to die.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“He mans his ships and loads with merchandise<span class="linenum">34</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and many an offering curious, rare and rich,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and there religious life to lead he hies</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where lies our Prophet who our Law did preach:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But ere abandon’d home, his satrapies,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that lackèd lawful heir, he parts to each</span>
          <br>
          <span>and all he lovèd: Hence his intimates he</span>
          <br>
          <span>from want made wealthy, and from serfdom free.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“To this Cochim, to that falls Cananor,<span class="linenum">35</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">one hath Chalé, another th’ Isle Piment,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a third Coulam, a fourth takes Cranganor,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the rest is theirs with whom he rests content.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Only one Youth, for whom warm love he bore,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when all was parted, did himself present:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Nothing save Calecut for him remainèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span>which, by her traffick, wealth and rank had gainèd.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_267">[Pg 267]</span> “On him the title par’amount he bestows<span class="linenum">36</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Emperor, with sway o’er ev’ery state;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and, made this partage, there he dil’igent goes,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where, after Santon-life, he met his fate:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thus ’twas the name of Samorim arose,—</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of all this region proudest potentate,—</span>
          <br>
          <span>borne by the Youth, and by his heirs from whom</span>
          <br>
          <span>this who now wields imperial pow’er is come.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“The Law that holds the people, high and low,<span class="linenum">37</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">is fraught with false phantastick tales long past:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they go unclothèd, but a wrap they throw</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for decent purpose round the loins and waist:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Two modes of men are known; the nobles know</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the name of Nayrs, who call the lower caste</span>
          <br>
          <span>Poléas, whom their haughty laws contain</span>
          <br>
          <span>from intermingling with the higher strain:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“For men who aye had office in one guise<span class="linenum">38</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with mates of other office ne’er may wive;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">nor may the son the calling exercise</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">save sire’s and foresires’ long as he shall live.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">These Nayrs as sin and shame, forsooth, despise</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the touch of outcasts, and they fain believe</span>
          <br>
          <span>that, peradventure, if the touch occur,</span>
          <br>
          <span>a thousand rites must wash their bodies pure.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_268">[Pg 268]</span> “In sim’ilar form the Júdæan folk of old<span class="linenum">39</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">touch’d not the peoples of Samaria-reign:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But strangenesses far stranger than I’ve told</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of varied usages shall meet your eyne.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">None save the Nayrs affront the manifold</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">chances of war, who like stone-wall sustain</span>
          <br>
          <span>their King from enemies, arms aye in hand,</span>
          <br>
          <span>in left the target, and in right the brand.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Entitled Brahmins are their ghostly race,<span class="linenum">40</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">time-honour’d title of high eminence:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">His far-famed precepts, eke, they still embrace</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who first to Science lent a modest sense:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-11" id="noteref-11">[11]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">A living thing to kill they hold as base,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">such be from ev’ery flesh their abstinence:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Only in joys venereal their delight</span>
          <br>
          <span>hath more of licence and a laxer rite.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Common the women are, although confine’d<span class="linenum">41</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to those belonging to their husbands’ blood:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Happy condition! happy humankind,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who over jealous wrongs may never brood!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">These and more customs various shall ye find</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">among the Mal’abar men still holding good:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Great is the country, rich in ev’ery style</span>
          <br>
          <span>of goods from China sent by sea to Nyle.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_269">[Pg 269]</span> Thus spake the Moorman: Now on vagueing wing<span class="linenum">42</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">about the city Rumour wildly flew</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with bruit of foreign comers; when the King</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sent out his servants seeking tidings true:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Then through the streets begirt by mighty ring</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of ev’ery age and sex that flockt to view,</span>
          <br>
          <span>came the Grandees who by the King were bade</span>
          <br>
          <span>to bring the Captain of the strange Armade.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But he by royal leave allow’d for land<span class="linenum">43</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to change his floating home, accompanied</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by his stout Portingalls, a chosen band</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in richest robes to meet the Monarch hied:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The beauteous contrasts of the hues command</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the crowd’s approval, who with wonder eyed:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Smiteth the cadence’d oar with cooly gleam</span>
          <br>
          <span>now the salt ocean, then the frore fresh stream.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>There stood a Regent of the Realm ashore,<span class="linenum">44</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a chief, in native parlance “Cat’ual<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-12" id="noteref-12">[12]</a>” hight,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by noble Nayrs surrounded, waiting for</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">illustrious Gama, with a strange delight:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Now to the land our Chief in arms he bore,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and a rich-cushion’d couch in litter light</span>
          <br>
          <span>he proff’ereth as a coach (an usage old),</span>
          <br>
          <span>which bearer-people on their shoulders hold.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_270">[Pg 270]</span> Thus he of Lusus, he of Malabar,<span class="linenum">45</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wend whither sitteth ’waiting them the King:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Follow the Portingalls in form of War</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for foot-troops, marching fierce and threatening:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The people, buzzing with confusèd jar</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to see the strangers, fain of questioning</span>
          <br>
          <span>gather’d, but in the cent’uries long gone by</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Babel-tower did such hope deny.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Now with the Cat’ual Gama speech exchangèd<span class="linenum">46</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on things th’ occasion and the moment chose:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Interpreteth the tongues so far estrangèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Monsaydé, for the twain right well he knows.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thus the procession through the City rangèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whither a noble, splendid pile arose;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and, reached the precincts of a sumptuous Fane,</span>
          <br>
          <span>through the tall portals paced on equal plane.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Here frightful forms of men’s idolatries<span class="linenum">47</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">stand carved in lifeless stock and death-cold stone,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">varied in gestures, various of dyes,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">e’en as by feigning Fiend to man made known:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Abominable forms the sight surprise</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with mingled members like Chimæra shown:</span>
          <br>
          <span>The Christians, wont to see their God-in-Man,</span>
          <br>
          <span>these hybrid monsters with blank wonder scan.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_271">[Pg 271]</span> One bore two horns insculpture’d on his brow<span class="linenum">48</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">like Jove called Ammon in the Libyan wold;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">this, double faces on one form did show,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">like two-faced Janus limned in church of old;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that had of arms a long divided row</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">mocking Briareus’ members manifold;</span>
          <br>
          <span>that thing a canine front external bore,</span>
          <br>
          <span>such as th’ Anubis Memphians did adore.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The barb’arous Géntoo in his Gods’ abode<span class="linenum">49</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a superstitious adoration paid;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">then both went straight, ne’er straying from the road,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where the vain people’s King his sojourn made:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The stream of starers fuller still o’erflow’d,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for all to sight the stranger Chief essay’d;</span>
          <br>
          <span>while to the roofs and casements gazing came</span>
          <br>
          <span>greybeard and stripling, damosel and dame.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Now near they, marching with no shorten’d stride,<span class="linenum">50</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">fair fragrant gardens and perfumèd bowers,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wherein the royal palace-buildings hide,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a structure sumptu’ous though not tall in towers:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The chiefs and nobles choose to build and ’bide</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where cooly bosquets teem with fruits and flowers:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Thus dwell the rulers of the race, delighting</span>
          <br>
          <span>in seats the City and the Camp uniting.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_272">[Pg 272]</span> The precinct portals by their work betray<span class="linenum">51</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">subtleties telling of the dædal hand,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in forms whose noble presences display</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the hoar antiquities of India-land:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The marvel-stories of her antient day,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with such a living art enfigured stand,</span>
          <br>
          <span>that whoso reads them with a lore exact,</span>
          <br>
          <span>knows from the Fiction what hath been the Fact.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>There puissant armies show and proudly tread<span class="linenum">52</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that Orient region which Hydaspes laves;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a smooth brow’d Capitayne is at the head,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and with his leafy Thyrsus leads his Braves.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">By him was Nysa-city ’stablishèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">hard by the margin of the murm’urous waves;</span>
          <br>
          <span>so proper was the God e’en Semelé</span>
          <br>
          <span>her son beholding would have said, “’Tis he!”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>And there yon arrowy river draining dry<span class="linenum">53</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">th’ Assyrian peoples multitud’inous bear</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a queenly sceptre, fem’inine seigniory,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of fair the fairest and as foul as fair.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-13" id="noteref-13">[13]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Fast by her side with fury flaming high</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">her sculptured genet proudly paweth air,</span>
          <br>
          <span>in whom her son a rival lover fand</span>
          <br>
          <span>Oh vile incont’inence! Oh amour nefand!</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_273">[Pg 273]</span> At farther distance trembled in their pride<span class="linenum">54</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the flags and banners of the glorious Greek,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Monarchies the Third, and conqu’ering hied</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">far as the bill’owy Gange his sea doth seek:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">That youthful Captain’s semblance is their guide,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whom Vict’ory’s wreathèd palms of valour deck,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who claims a seat among the Gods above</span>
          <br>
          <span>no longer Philip’s son, but son of Jove.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>While on these mem’ories dwelt the Portughuese,<span class="linenum">55</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thus did the Cat’ual to the Captain say:—</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“Soon dawns the day when other victories</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall these thou seest, dim and disarray:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here shall indited be new histories,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">made by the Wand’erers who shall wend this way:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Thus Fate was found by wise and wizard men,</span>
          <br>
          <span>inspirèd Magians who the future ken.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And eke inspireth them the magick sense,<span class="linenum">56</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that nought availeth to defend such Ill,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of all that mortals bring to their defence;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for earthly Wits must bend to heav’enly Will:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">It also saith the Stranger’s excellence</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in Arts of Peace, as in his bellic skill,</span>
          <br>
          <span>shall be so puissant, all the world shall know</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Conq’ueror’s measure by his conquered Foe.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_274">[Pg 274]</span> Discoursing thus they reached the levée-hall,<span class="linenum">57</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wherein that great and glorious Emperor</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sat on a cushion’d couch which, though ’twas small,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for work and worth was never seen before:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Showed his reclining gest imperial</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a potent, grave, and prosperous Signior:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Golden his loin-cloth, and the diadem</span>
          <br>
          <span>that crowns his brow doth blaze with many a gem.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Hard by his side an old man reverent,<span class="linenum">58</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">knelt on the floor, and now and then a few</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">green leaves of pungent pepper did present,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in wonted usage for the Sire to chew.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">A Brahmin, personage pre-eminent,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with gliding gait beside the Gama drew,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and led him up the potent King to greet,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who with a nod designed a facing seat.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>When near that splendid couch took place the guest,<span class="linenum">59</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and others farther off, prompt glance and keen</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Samo’rim cast on folk whose garb and gest</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">were like to nothing he had ever seen:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Then, speaking gravely from his stately breast,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">adding authority to noble mien,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and gaining credence of the King and crowd,</span>
          <br>
          <span>his royal message spake our Chief aloud:—</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_275">[Pg 275]</span> “A mighty King there thronèd, whither roll<span class="linenum">60</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">voluble Heavens in eternal round,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where Earth by Earth conceals the rays of Sol,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">tingeing the world he left with gloom profound;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">hearing the rumours which from distant goal</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">respond to Echo, how on Indic ground</span>
          <br>
          <span>thine is the sole imperial Majesty,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the knot of Friendship lief would knit with thee.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And by long devious courses his command<span class="linenum">61</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sent me to say, that all things mercantile,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which go by ocean or which go by land,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">supplied by realms betwixt the Tage and Nyle;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from foggy Zealand’s frore Pole-fronting strand,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to the far lands where Sol ne’er changeth style</span>
          <br>
          <span>of days, that splendid shine on Æthiop shore,</span>
          <br>
          <span>all these his kingdom holds in mighty store.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And if thou wilt, with pacts and firmest ties<span class="linenum">62</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of naked, sacred Peace and Friendship rare,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">allow exchange of superfluities</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his earth and thine with like abundance bear;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">making the rents and rev’enues richer rise</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">(wherefore men toil and travail, sweat and fare)</span>
          <br>
          <span>for both the countries, certès, shall pertain</span>
          <br>
          <span>to him great glory and to thee great gain.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_276">[Pg 276]</span> “And when thus knitted Friendship’s steadfast
            knot<span class="linenum">63</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which aye you mighty monarchs twain shall bind,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">prompt will he be against all adverse lot,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by chance of warfare to thy reign design’d,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with soldiers, arms, and ships; so men shall wot</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thy friend and brother they in him shall find:</span>
          <br>
          <span>He hopeth eke that when thy course is tracèd</span>
          <br>
          <span>by sure response to see my mission gracèd.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Such royal message spake our Chief before<span class="linenum">64</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Géntoo King, who thus vouchsafed reply,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that to receive such fair Ambassador</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from land so far he holdeth honour high:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But that his final will fain standeth o’er</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">till tane the counsel of his ministry,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who shall make certain, after long debate,</span>
          <br>
          <span>what King he speaketh of, what race, what state.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Meanwhile from labours past the Chief may wend<span class="linenum">65</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where rest awaits him, and in brief delay</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to the despatch he will due care extend,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whereby their King shall greet their homeward way.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">This said, brought sombre Night the wonted end</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to human labours of the livelong Day,</span>
          <br>
          <span>soothing the weary limbs with balmy swoon,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and tirèd eyne with sweet Oblivion’s boon.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_277">[Pg 277]</span> The Gama, with his Portingalls remainèd,<span class="linenum">66</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whom, upon hospitable thought intent,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the noble Indian Regent entertainèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with feast and joy and general content.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The Cat’ual, to his monarch’s service trainèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sought surest tidings; ’twas his regiment</span>
          <br>
          <span>to learn how, when, and whence the Folk had come,</span>
          <br>
          <span>what laws were theirs, what customs, and what home.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Soon as he saw the Delian Car of fire<span class="linenum">67</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the fair Youth drives, come forth and light restore,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he summoneth Monsaydé for desire</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to know the strangers new to th’ Indian shore.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Ready and curious now he ’gins enquire</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">if certain signs, pure proofs, the Moorman bore</span>
          <br>
          <span>anent these foreigners, as men had said</span>
          <br>
          <span>hard by his country they were born and bred:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>That punct’ual proof partic’ular he must bring<span class="linenum">68</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with general information; as ’twould be</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">notable service done to tell the King</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all that could guide him in such novelty.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Rejoins Monsaydé:—“Alb’eit ev’erything</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">I lief recount, yet count it not from me:</span>
          <br>
          <span>I only ken they bide in distant Spain,</span>
          <br>
          <span>where bathe my nest and Phœbus in the Main.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_278">[Pg 278]</span> “They hold a Prophet’s Law who was begot<span class="linenum">69</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sinless, nor stained with carnal detriment</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">His Virgin-Mother; Him the Breath<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-14" id="noteref-14">[14]</a> they wot</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of God who holdeth Earth in government.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But what my sires ancestral ne’er forgot,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of them, is Valour fierce, sanguinolent</span>
          <br>
          <span>in arms, that on their arm resplendent gloweth,</span>
          <br>
          <span>as many a Geste with our forefathers showeth.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“For they, with brav’ery better than of man,<span class="linenum">70</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">outdrave our grandsires from the fertile leas</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where fresh Guadiána and rich Tagus ran,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with famed and memorable instances:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Still seeking triumphs, in far African</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">parts, spurning perils of the stormy seas</span>
          <br>
          <span>our plans of safety and of peace they foil,</span>
          <br>
          <span>they break our lofty walls, our towns they spoil.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Nor less of force and fraud they showed, whene’er<span class="linenum">71</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">kindled were other wars by Fate’s decree,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">or when Spain’s warlike sons to fight would fare,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">or there, when others poured down Pyrenee:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">And thus, in fine, to thrust of foreign spear</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ne’er bowed they, owning alien mastery</span>
          <br>
          <span>ne’er yet was known, I swear no man can tell us</span>
          <br>
          <span>to Hannibals like these e’er came Marcellus.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_279">[Pg 279]</span> “And if my tidings faulty seem and few,<span class="linenum">72</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">what thou requirest that to ask them send;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ask of themselves, for they be proud and true</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and falsehoods most annoy them and offend:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Go see their fleet and arms, their manner view</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of moulded metal, ready all to shend:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Wend thou and note the Lusians’ various art</span>
          <br>
          <span>in Peace and War, the sight shall glad thy heart.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Flamed with desire the Idol-servant’s mind<span class="linenum">73</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to sight the marvels told him by the Moor:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">He bade the boats be manned, and straight incline’d</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to view the vessels which the Gama bore:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Both leave the foreshore, and their boat behind</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">came Nayran hosts, till Ocean curdled o’er:</span>
          <br>
          <span>They scale the Flagship’s gunwales strong and tall;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and, reacht the main-deck, are received by Paul.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Her purple awnings and her banners shine<span class="linenum">74</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with the rich tissue which the worm hath made;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whereon appear portray’d with rare design</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the warlike actions of the mighty Dead:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here show fierce accidents of ’battled line,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and there fere single-fights, a scene of dread,</span>
          <br>
          <span>wherefrom the Géntoo seeking all to ’spy</span>
          <br>
          <span>may not withdraw the pleasure of his eye.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_280">[Pg 280]</span> He asks of all he sees: But Gama pray’d<span class="linenum">75</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he first be seated, and in cool retreat</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">be pleased to taste the food before him spread,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which Epicurus’ sect holds highest treat.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The spumy vases gen’erous liquors shed</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which first did Noah make the world to weet:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Yet nills the Géntoo-man to break his fast,</span>
          <br>
          <span>as ’twas forbidden by the laws of Caste.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The blaring Trumpet, which in Peace the thought<span class="linenum">76</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Warfare im’ages, rends the lift like thunder:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The diabolick instruments fire-fraught</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wake slumb’ering echoes there, the sea-depths under.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Noted the Géntoo all: But most he sought</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to read th’ intention and the works of wonder</span>
          <br>
          <span>done by the Heroes which in scanty space</span>
          <br>
          <span>Picture, mute Poesy, had power to trace.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>He riseth, Gama rising by his side,<span class="linenum">77</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and there Coelho with the Mauritan:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">With curious eyne a warlike form they eye’d,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">an old white Sire of aspect sovereign,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose name and honours in our hearts shall ’bide,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">long as the World shall know the name of man:</span>
          <br>
          <span>In garb of Grecian usage stands he dight,</span>
          <br>
          <span>bearing device of leaf-branch in his right.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_281">[Pg 281]</span> His right a leaf-branch bore:—But oh! how blind<span class="linenum">78</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">I madly rush to ’tempt without your stay,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ye Nymphs of Tagus and Mondego kind,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a path so varied, long and ard’uous way!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Lend me your favour while my way shall wind</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">o’er the deep Ocean ’mid the Storm’s affray;</span>
          <br>
          <span>for sore I fear me an ye leave the helm</span>
          <br>
          <span>the waves my fragile barque shall overwhelm.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>See how my Lay so long to sing hath striven<span class="linenum">79</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">your Tagus and the Lusians dear to you,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">how oft this exile Fate from home hath driven,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">new labours ever suff’ering, losses new:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Now tempting Ocean, then all helpless driven</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the dread Mavortian risks and wrongs to rue;</span>
          <br>
          <span>self-doomed as Canacé to death abhor’d,</span>
          <br>
          <span>in this hand aye the Pen, in that the Sword:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Now sunk by hateful scornèd Penury<span class="linenum">80</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to chew the bitter bit of beggar-bread:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Then mockt by Hope already brought so nigh</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to be anew and more than e’er misled:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Then with bare life in hand condemned to fly</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where life depended from so fine a thread;</span>
          <br>
          <span>only a greater miracle could save,</span>
          <br>
          <span>than what to Judah’s King<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-15" id="noteref-15">[15]</a>
            new life-lease gave.</span>
</p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_282">[Pg 282]</span> And still, my Nymphs! ’twas not enough of pain<span class="linenum">81</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">such sorrow-clouds around my life should close;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but they, for whom I sang the patriot-strain,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with sad return must pay my toils, my throes:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">In place of Peace and Rest I hoped to gain,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in lieu of Bay-wreaths bound around my brows,</span>
          <br>
          <span>troubles by men unseen they must invent,</span>
          <br>
          <span>when ills of every kind my soul torment.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Behold, ye Nymphs! what high-bred Lords and wise<span class="linenum">82</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">breedeth your Tagus, what a gen’erous race,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who in such fashion with such favours prize</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Bard whose boon hath lent their lordships grace!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">For coming writers what examples rise</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to raise Man’s genius to its Pride of Place,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to shrine memorious in the Poet’s story</span>
          <br>
          <span>Deeds that deserve to gain eternal glory!</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But since such hosts of ills around me lie,<span class="linenum">83</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">let not my Fancy of your favour fail</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">here chiefest wanted as the goal draws nigh,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that mighty feats wax mightier by my tale:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Aid me you only, long indeed sware I</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">no grace to grant where good doth not prevail,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and none to flatter whatso their degrees,</span>
          <br>
          <span>on pain of losing all my pow’er to please.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_283">[Pg 283]</span> Think not, ah no, my Nymphs! I would enfame<span class="linenum">84</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the man who dares his country and his King</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">forget for private int’erest’s pit’iful claim,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by law of God and Man a felon thing.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Nor poor ambition, whose degraded aim</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">is to win office, shall my Song e’er sing,</span>
          <br>
          <span>whose only object in th’ ignoble prize</span>
          <br>
          <span>is larger range of Vice and Infamies.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>None, who misusing pow’ers on him confer’d,<span class="linenum">85</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">makes them the panders of his ugly greed;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">none, who to court and cringe before the herd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in change of figure Proteus shall exceed.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">From me, Camenæ, fear no fav’ouring word</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for him who comes, in grave and honest weed,</span>
          <br>
          <span>in new-born rank his King contenting more,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to fleece and flay the miserable poor.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Nor him who, holding ’tis but just and right,<span class="linenum">86</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his King’s severest orders to fulfil,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">holds it not Justice fitly to requite</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the servile brows that weary sweat distil:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Nor him whose bosom, lacking pract’ical light,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">seeketh for causes, and by prudent skill</span>
          <br>
          <span>taxeth with niggard heart and hand unfair,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the toils of aliens which he doth not share.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_284">[Pg 284]</span> Only of men I’ll sing the glorious name<span class="linenum">87</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who riskèd darling life for God, for King;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when losing life they lengthened life by fame,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and well deserved the best that Bard can sing.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Apollo and the Nine, who with me came,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">redoubled fury to my song shall bring</span>
          <br>
          <span>when rest and breathing from my travail tane</span>
          <br>
          <span>I to my toil refresht shall come again.</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>

    </section>

    <section id="canto-vii-endnotes">

      <h3>Canto VII. Endnotes.</h3>

      <ol>
        <li id="note-1">
          <p>The Church. <a href="#noteref-1" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-2">
          <p>Henry VIII. <a href="#noteref-2" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-3">
          <p>Saladin. <a href="#noteref-3" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-4">
          <p>François I. <a href="#noteref-4" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-5">
          <p>River of Tripoli. <a href="#noteref-5" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-6">
          <p>Carolus Magnus and St. Louis. <a href="#noteref-6" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-7">
          <p>Poetic prophecy of the coming kingdom, Byzantium. <a href="#noteref-7" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-8">
          <p>Imaus = Híma-álaya = Snow-house. <a href="#noteref-8" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-9">
          <p>The Samiry Rajah of Malabar. <a href="#noteref-9" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-10">
          <p>Perimál Princes of Malayálam. <a href="#noteref-10" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-11">
          <p>Pythagoras the Philosophos, not Sophos. <a href="#noteref-11" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-12">
          <p>Kot-wál, captain of fort. <a href="#noteref-12" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-13">
          <p>Semiramis. <a href="#noteref-13" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-14">
          <p>Ruh Allah (the Breath of Allah). <a href="#noteref-14" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-15">
          <p>Hezekiah. <a href="#noteref-15" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </section>
  </section>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

  <section id="canto-viii">
    <h2>Canto VIII.</h2>

    <section id="canto-viii-argument">

      <p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_287">[Pg 287]</span></p>

      <h3>Argument<br>
        of the Eighth Canto.</h3>

      <p>The Governor of Calecut seeth various pictures upon the banners
        of the Armada; and heareth the account of them given by Paul da
        Gama: Origin of the word “Lusitania”: Glorious feats of the
        Portugueze Kings (and of their Vassals) till the reign of King
        D. Afonso V.: The Samori ordereth the Haruspices to consult
        futurity respecting the Armada: They report to him evil of the
        Navigators: They attempt to destroy Da Gama who satisfieth the
        King in a notable speech.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="canto-viii-another-argument">

      <h3>Another Argument.</h3>

      <blockquote class="poetry italics" lang="pt"><div>

        <p>
          <span>Vêm-se de Lusitania os Fundadores,</span>
          <br>
          <span>E aquelles, que por feitos valerosos,</span>
          <br>
          <span>De alta memoria são merecedores,</span>
          <br>
          <span>De hymnos, e de versos numerosos:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Como de Calecut os Regedores,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Consultam os Haruspices famosos,</span>
          <br>
          <span>E corruptos com dadivas possantes,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Tratam de destruir os navegantes.</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>

      <table class="table-poetry">
        <tbody>
          <tr>
            <td>Seen are the Founders of the Lusian race,</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="4">(1–42)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>And Braves whose valiant actions brightest shine,</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>On Mem’ory’s page deserving highest place,</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>And tuneful hymn, and Poet’s numbered line:</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>What way of Calecut the Regents base</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="4">(43–end)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Consult the famous Augurs who design,</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Bought with all-puissant bribes, to show their skill,</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>And by their cunning the Discov’erers kill.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>
    </section>
    <section id="canto-viii-body">

      <p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_289"></a>[Pg 289]</span></p>
      <h3>Canto VIII.</h3>

      <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

        <p>
          <span>Tarried the Cat’ual, standing mute before<span class="linenum">1</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the first of painted forms that stood in sight;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who for Device in hand a leaf-branch bore,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with meteor-beard, long-flowing, flossy-white.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“Whose counterfeit presentment this; wherefore</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the strange device he holdeth in his right?”</span>
          <br>
          <span>When Paul, with sober accents answering said,—</span>
          <br>
          <span>while the wise Moor for both interpretèd:—</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“All of these figures which to thee are shown<span class="linenum">2</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">so bold in bearing, dreadful to behold,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and bolder, dreader far, the men were known</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in mouth of Fame, for words and works of old:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Antients yet moderns are, still brighter grown</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with names in Genius’ highest rank enrol’d:</span>
          <br>
          <span>This first in sight is Lusus, from whose fame</span>
          <br>
          <span>our ‘Lusitania’ gained her royal name.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_290">[Pg 290]</span> “He was the Theban’s son or comrade tried,<span class="linenum">3</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the God who divers regions overran;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">it seems he came to hold our Spanish nide,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">pursuing conquests which his youth began:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Douro’s and Guadiána’s plains of pride,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of yore ‘Elysian Fields,’ his fancy wan</span>
          <br>
          <span>so much, he there would give his weary bones</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Tomb eterne, the term our country owns.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“The branch-Device, thou see’st him bear in hand,<span class="linenum">4</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">is the green Thyrsus Bacchus wont to wield,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which to our cent’ury doth belief command</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he was a comrade or belovèd child.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See’st thou yon other treading Tagus-land,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Plow’er who long hath plow’d the wild Sea-field,</span>
          <br>
          <span>where the perpetual walls he reared on high,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and fane of Pallas for all memory?</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Ulysses ’tis who builds that sacred fane<span class="linenum">5</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to her, whose favour tongue facund supplies;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">if there he fired tall Troy on Asian plain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">here made he mighty Lisbon’s walls arise.”</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“Whom have we here, who cumbers with the slain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the field, whose furious presence frights the eyes?</span>
          <br>
          <span>He drives great armies to disgraceful rout,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and on his banners painted eagles float.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_291">[Pg 291]</span> The Géntoo thus, and Gama’s answer came:—<span class="linenum">6</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“Thou see’st a Herdsman who his flock forsook;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">we know that Viriátus was his name,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who aye preferred the Lance before the Crook:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">He shook and shattered Roman pride and fame;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from this unvanquisht victor ne’er she took</span>
          <br>
          <span>Ah, no! nor ever could her power take</span>
          <br>
          <span>the primacy which Pyrrhus failed to break.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Not force but fraud she used, and underhand<span class="linenum">7</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">she filcht his life that cowed her coward sprite;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for mighty straits make men of honest brand</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">break the magnan’imous laws of Honour bright.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">This other here, against his angry land</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with us forgatherèd, an exiled wight:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Right well chose he the men wherewith to rise,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and of immortal lustre snatch the prize.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Thou see’st with us he beats the Flags that bear<span class="linenum">8</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Jove’s valiant birds, victorious, sovereign;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">e’en in those days no Braves so brave but wear</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">our yoke, subjected to our might and main:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See his so subtle arts, his wily care</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the people by his deep design to gain;</span>
          <br>
          <span>that Prophet-Hind aye dealing wise advice:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Sertorius he; the Doe is his Device.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_292">[Pg 292]</span> “See now this other painted flag upon,<span class="linenum">9</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of our first Kings the great progenitor:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Our Hist’ory makes him to be Hung’ary’s son,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but strangers say Lorraine the hero bore.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">When with the chivalry of proud Leon</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and the Gallego he lay low the Moor,</span>
          <br>
          <span>unto Sanct Sep’ulchre saintly Henry hied</span>
          <br>
          <span>that might his kingly trunk be sanctified.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Say, prithee, who be this that frights my sight?”<span class="linenum">10</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">(asketh th’ astonied man of Malabar)</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“who all these squadrons, all these men of might</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with his thin legions thus can rout and mar?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Who breaks such bulwarks proud in breadth and height,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who gives such battle, never tired of war,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who comes so many crowns in many parts</span>
          <br>
          <span>to trample under foot, and estandarts?”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“The First Afonso ’tis,” the Gama spake,<span class="linenum">11</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“by whom the Moor all Portugalia lost;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for whom Fame sware her oath by Stygian Lake</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">no more of noble Roman name to boast:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The Zealot he whom God would ne’er forsake</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by whose brave arm He tames the Moorish host,</span>
          <br>
          <span>for whom their wallèd reign He lays so low</span>
          <br>
          <span>no more is left for future days to do.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_293">[Pg 293]</span> “Had Cæsar, or King Alexander led<span class="linenum">12</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a power so puny, men-at-arms so few,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">against the multitudes unnumberèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">this excellent Commander overthrew;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">deem not their names had earth thus overspread,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">nor could their deathless glories death subdue:</span>
          <br>
          <span>But leave we such inexplicable Deeds</span>
          <br>
          <span>and see what worth of vassal-men he leads.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“This whom thou seest sight with kindling eye<span class="linenum">13</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his broken pupil, fierce in high disdain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">bidding him rally flying hosts, and try</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">once more the desp’erate fortunes of the plain:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Returneth Youth with Age to do or die,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and turns the vanquisht Vanquisher again:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Egas Moníz, the gallant vet’eran hight,</span>
          <br>
          <span>is Knighthood’s mirror to each loyal knight.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“See’ him here self-yielded with his sons he goes,<span class="linenum">14</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">naked of silk and cloth with neck in cord,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">because the Youth to break the promise chose</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which to Castile he gave with plighted word:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">He lured by specious promises the foes</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to raise the siege when sov’ereign waged the sword:</span>
          <br>
          <span>To life’s last pains he dooms his sons and wife</span>
          <br>
          <span>and self-condemnèd saves his Liege’s life.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_294">[Pg 294]</span> “Less did the Consul<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-16" id="noteref-16">[16]</a> whom the hosts surround<span class="linenum">15</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when to the Caudine Forks he careless came,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and there his head to bow and pass was bound</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’neath the triumphant Samnites’ yoke of shame:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">This, blamed at home, an inborn firmness found</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to yield him singly, true to constant aim;</span>
          <br>
          <span>this other yieldeth self and innocent seed</span>
          <br>
          <span>and wife,—more glorious and more grievous deed.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“See’st thou the Brave who, left his ambuscade,<span class="linenum">16</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">falls on the King besieging yon tall town,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the town unsieging and the King waylaid:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Illustrious action Mars might call his own!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See him, here wends he, limned in yon Armade,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">till eke at sea the Moormen slain or flown</span>
          <br>
          <span>lost all their galleys; while he claims the prize</span>
          <br>
          <span>that heads our host of maritime victories:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Fuás Roupinho ’tis; o’er wave and land<span class="linenum">17</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his name shall aye resplend with equal light,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">reflecting flames that lit his daring hand</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in Moorman galleys under Ab’yla’s height.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See how at just and saintly War’s command</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">happy he loses life in holy fight:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Enters by Moorish hands the heavenly calm</span>
          <br>
          <span>his Soul, triumphant with the well-won Palm.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_295">[Pg 295]</span> “See’st not this Gath’ering in strange garb that
            came<span class="linenum">18</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">swarming from out yon Navy new and brave,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who holp our first of Kings the foe to tame</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and ’leaguing Lisbon saintly proof they gave?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Behold Henrique,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-17" id="noteref-17">[17]</a> Knight of
            peerless fame,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and eke the Palm that grew beside his grave:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Thro’ them His marvels God to man hath shown:—</span>
          <br>
          <span>Germans be they the martyrs <span class="smcap">Christ</span> shall own.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Behold a Churchman brandishing his skeyne<span class="linenum">19</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">against Arronches which he takes, the chance</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Leïría ’venging lately tane</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by men who couch for Mafamed the lance.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’Tis Theotonio, Prior.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-18" id="noteref-18">[18]</a> See
            again</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">besiegèd Sant’arem, and shalt see the glance</span>
          <br>
          <span>assured that figures on the mure and first</span>
          <br>
          <span>wave o’er the walls the Quinal Banner durst:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“See here he hies, where low our Sancho layeth<span class="linenum">20</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Vandal Moor who in fierce fight atones;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">pierceth th’ opponent host, his Antient slayeth,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and trails th’ Hispalic pendon o’er the stones:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Mem Moniz he, who in his life portrayeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the valour buried with his Father’s bones;</span>
          <br>
          <span>digne of these Banners, since his force ne’er failèd</span>
          <br>
          <span>to raise his own, to rout whate’er assailèd.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_296">[Pg 296]</span> “Behold that other, sliding down his spear,—<span class="linenum">21</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">bearing two head of sentinels he slew,—</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">better to hide his ambush; now appear</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his Braves whose might and sleight the town o’erthrew:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">And now her ’scutcheon shows the Cavalier</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">proper who holds in hand the coupèd two</span>
          <br>
          <span>cold ghastly heads. A deed ne’er done indeed!</span>
          <br>
          <span>Giraldo Sem-pavor<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-19" id="noteref-19">[19]</a> the
            stout name read.</span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span>“See’st not a Spaniard<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-20" id="noteref-20">[20]</a>
            who, dissatisfied<span class="linenum">22</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with our ninth King Afonso, by old hate</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Lara movèd, with the Moor abide</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in friendship hostile to our Port’ugal state?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Abrantes town he takes accompanied</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by the hard Infidel, his Moorish mate:</span>
          <br>
          <span>But see a Portingall with pow’er so spare</span>
          <br>
          <span>rout him, and stoutly lead him prisoner:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Martim Lopés the Knight by name is known<span class="linenum">23</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who from the traitors palms and laurels took.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But here behold the Bishop Mil’itant shown,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who changed for steely Lance his golden Crook:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See him, ’mid faithless faithful found alone,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">fight to refuse refusing, shake and shock</span>
          <br>
          <span>the cruel Moorman: See in shining skies</span>
          <br>
          <span>the sign whereby his few he multiplies.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_297">[Pg 297]</span> “See, fly the Kings of Cord’oba and Sevile<span class="linenum">24</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">routed, with other twain in shortest tale:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Routed! nay, rather, ruined. Miracle</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">God-wrought, not worked by arm of mortal frail!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See Alcacer low bend her haughty will;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ne tow’ers of flesh, ne walls of steel avail</span>
          <br>
          <span>’gainst Lisbon’s Bishop, Dom Mathéus: See!</span>
          <br>
          <span>crowned with the palmy crown there standeth he.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Behold a Master of Castilian line,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-21" id="noteref-21">[21]</a><span class="linenum">25</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a Portingall by right of birth, o’errun</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Algarves Kingdom till she shows no sign</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of men-at-arms his force hath not undone:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">By guile, and might and main, and star benign</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">towns, castles, cities, all are stormed and won.</span>
          <br>
          <span>Soon ’spite her townsmen Tavila-town he breaks,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and for the Se’ven slain Hunters vengeance takes.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“See him with bellic arts from Moormen gain<span class="linenum">26</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Sylves, they gainèd with enormous host:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Paio Corrêa ’tis, whose might and main</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and cunning purpose men aye envy most.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Nor pass the fighting three<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-22" id="noteref-22">[22]</a> in
            France and Spain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who won a name that never shall be lost</span>
          <br>
          <span>for tournay, challenges and joustings gay;</span>
          <br>
          <span>winning of publick trophies proud display:</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_298">[Pg 298]</span> “See’st them? how clept ‘Adventurers,’ they
            came<span class="linenum">27</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Castileward, whence alone the prize and pride</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they bore, the winnings of Bellona’s game</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as to their loss all found a fall who tried:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See them strike down the Knights of proudest fame</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who of the three the principal defied,</span>
          <br>
          <span>’tis Gónçalo Ribéiro, name so brave</span>
          <br>
          <span>hath nought to fear from Lethe’s whelmy wave.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“To one attend, whose Fame so far extendeth,<span class="linenum">28</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that with no fame of old she rests content,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who, when his country on a thread dependeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">lends stalwart shoulders to the burthen bent;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See’st not how anger-flusht he reprehendeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the cowèd throng’s suspicions cold and lent;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and makes the wretches hail the gentle rein</span>
          <br>
          <span>of home-born King, not foreign Suzerain?</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“See him, with daring and advice replete<span class="linenum">29</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">God-guarded only and by Holy Star,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">make possible th’ impossible, and defeat</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">one-handed, proud Castilia’s pow’er of war.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See how by valour aided, might and wit,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in second slaughter vict’ory similar</span>
          <br>
          <span>he gains o’er those who, fierce as infinite, dwell</span>
          <br>
          <span>betwixt Tartessus and Guadiána’s vale?</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_299">[Pg 299]</span> “See’st not already all but overthrown<span class="linenum">30</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">our Lusitanian pow’er, when left his line</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Capitayne devout, who wends alone</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">t’ invoke that Essence, the Most Highest Trine?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Now see him summoned hast’ily by his own,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who plead that Fortune must parforce incline</span>
          <br>
          <span>to whelming force, and pray his presence cheer</span>
          <br>
          <span>the soldiers, and enforce their feeble fear.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Yet see the careless holy confidence,<span class="linenum">31</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wherewith ‘’Tis not yet time,’ he answerèd;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as one in God reposing trust immense</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of human vict’ory won by heav’enly aid:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">E’en so Pompilius, hearing the offence</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of en’emies urging o’er his land the raid,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to him who brought the heavy news replies,</span>
          <br>
          <span>‘But I, you see, am off’ering sacrifice!’</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“If one whose Brave’ry rests his God upon,<span class="linenum">32</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">perchance thou wouldest know how named and known,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">‘Portugale’s Scipio’ is the name he won,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but ‘Nuno Alvares’ claims more renown.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Happy the Land that bare her such a son!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">or, rather sire: For long as Suns look down</span>
          <br>
          <span>on Earth where Ceres and joint Neptune reign</span>
          <br>
          <span>for such a Scion she shall sigh in vain.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_300">[Pg 300]</span> “In the same Warfare see what prizes gaineth<span class="linenum">33</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">this other Captain of a slender band;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">driving commanders he the drove regaineth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which they had lifted with audacious hand:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See how the lance again in gore he staineth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">only to free, at Friendship’s firm command,</span>
          <br>
          <span>his thrallèd friend whom Honour made a thrall:—</span>
          <br>
          <span>Pero Rodrigues ’tis of Landroal.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Look on this Treachetour<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-23" id="noteref-23">[23]</a>
            and how he payeth<span class="linenum">34</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his caitiff trick’ery and his perj’ury fell;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Gil Fernandes of Elvas ’tis that slayeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the wretch, and sends him to his proper Hell:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Harrying Xeres-plain the crops he layeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with floods of blood that raineth proud Castile:</span>
          <br>
          <span>But see how Rúy Pereira’s face and front</span>
          <br>
          <span>enshield the galleys, bearing battle-brunt.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“See yon sev’enteen to Lusus who belong<span class="linenum">35</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">upon this hillock standing, life defend</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">against the Spaniards who four hundred strong,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to take them captive in their rear extend:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But to their sorrow these shall find ere long</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the stout defenders also can offend:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Feat digne to last till Earth succumb to Time;—</span>
          <br>
          <span>in the far Past, in Present day sublime!</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_301">[Pg 301]</span> “How the three hundred Braves, ’twas known of
            old,<span class="linenum">36</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">did with a thousand Romans battle wage,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in the good times when virile deeds and bold</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which Viriátus did, illumed his age:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">He snatcht memorious triumphs from their hold,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">bequeathing this our noblest heritage,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Brave tho’ few shall ne’er the Many fear,</span>
          <br>
          <span>as sithence thousand times we proved full clear.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Pedro and Henry view, those Infants twain<span class="linenum">37</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of kingly John the gen’erous progeny:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">That gars his fame illustrious to remain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in German-land and doometh Death to die:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">This Prince inspired by Heaven claimed the Main</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as her Explorer; and lay bare the lie</span>
          <br>
          <span>of tumid Moor’s vain boast in Ceita’s wall,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and, forced the gateway, entered first of all.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“See’st Country Pedro,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-24" id="noteref-24">[24]</a>
            daring to support<span class="linenum">38</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">two sieges laid by Barb’ary’s might entire;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and see’st yon other Count<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-25" id="noteref-25">[25]</a> who
            shows the port</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of earthly Mars in martial force and fire:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Sufficeth not to fence Alcacer-fort</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from swarming hosts; his spirit flieth higher,</span>
          <br>
          <span>his King’s beloved life the Brave defends</span>
          <br>
          <span>as stone-wall standing till his own he ends.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_302">[Pg 302]</span> “And here the Painters who in Art prevail,<span class="linenum">39</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">pardie, had many painted and portray’d;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but fail their pencils and their colours, fail</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">prize, praise, and premium, of Art’s life the bread.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Fault of the vices flowing from th’ entail</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of men degen’erate, who so far have stray’d</span>
          <br>
          <span>from valour’s paths where trod their lustrous sires,</span>
          <br>
          <span>deep mired in vanities and low desires.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Those high illustr’ious Fathers who gave birth<span class="linenum">40</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to generations on their grace depending,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">fought for fair <span class="allsmcap">HONOUR</span>, sternly strove on
            Earth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to found a fam’ily that could bear descending:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Blind! if paternal toils of priceless worth,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">won name, fame, claim so far and wide extending,</span>
          <br>
          <span>they leave their lesser sons but more obscure,</span>
          <br>
          <span>when left in crap’ulous vice to live impure.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Als there be others, sons of wealth and might,<span class="linenum">41</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who to no lordly tree by birth belong:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Fault of the Kings, who oft some favourite</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">prefer to thousands, wise and true and strong:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">For these the painted Past hath poor delight,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">feeling vain colours work them present wrong;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and aye as nat’ural foe in hate they bear</span>
          <br>
          <span>the speaking pictures which their semblance wear.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_303">[Pg 303]</span> “Gainsay I not, that some of high descent<span class="linenum">42</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from wealthy houses, men of gen’erous strain,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">still with their noble lives and excellent</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’herited titles worthily sustain:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">And if the light which ancestry hath lent</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">no novel glory by their doings gain,</span>
          <br>
          <span>at least it faileth not, nor dim it groweth:—</span>
          <br>
          <span>But ah! few men like these the Painter knoweth.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Thus Gama’s el’oquence told the mighty deeds,<span class="linenum">43</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">disclosed by various tints to stranger view,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where Art to sing’ular Artist-hand concedes</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">depainting Nature with her nat’ural hue.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The Cat’ual’s ready glance distinctly reads</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the surd-mute story and the tale so true:</span>
          <br>
          <span>A thousand times he askt, a thousand heard</span>
          <br>
          <span>each tasteful battle which his eyne prefer’d.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>And now the light a doubtful lustre showèd,<span class="linenum">44</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when veiled the mighty Lamp its lucent ray</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">beneath the sky’s round rim, and lum’inous glowèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on our Antipodes the smile of Day:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The gen’erous crowd of Nayrs and Géntoos rowèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">off from the stalwart ship on homeward way,</span>
          <br>
          <span>seeking repose and sleep’s delicious swoon,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to weary beings Night-tide’s gentle boon.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_304">[Pg 304]</span> Meanwhile those Augurs who most fame affy<span class="linenum">45</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in false opinion, that by sacrifice</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">forecast of future things which dubious lie,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thro’ diabolick sign and show they wis;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by royal mandate hied Black Arts to ply,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and various offices ’gan exercise,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to find what projects brought across the Main</span>
          <br>
          <span>unheard of foreigners from unknown Spain.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>By Demon-aidance truthful sign they learn,<span class="linenum">46</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">how doth this novel visitor portend</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a yoke perpet’ual, servitude eterne,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Race’s ruin and its valour’s end.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Th’ amazèd Augur, whom the proofs constern,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wends to the King and tells (e’en as he ken’d)</span>
          <br>
          <span>the fearful symptoms that had met his sight</span>
          <br>
          <span>by victim’d bowels brought anon to light.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>These signs confirming, to a Priest devout,<span class="linenum">47</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a man of mark in Mafamedé’s creed,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from preconceivèd hatred not remote</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’gainst Holy Faith, that doth all faiths exceed,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in the False Prophet’s form of evil note,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who drew his being from slave Hagar’s seed,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Bacchus the hateful in a dream appears,</span>
          <br>
          <span>whose hate is doubled by redoubled fears.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_305">[Pg 305]</span> “Guard ye, my children, guard ye,”—thus he
            spoke,<span class="linenum">48</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“from snares and perils laid by deadly foes</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who o’er the tumid waters hither flock,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">before the danger more immediate grows.”</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The Moorman, startled by these words, awoke</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in visionary fear: But soon arose</span>
          <br>
          <span>the thought that vulgar dream his brain opprest,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and thus returned he tranquil to his rest.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>When Bacchus thus returneth:—“Know’est thou not<span class="linenum">49</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the mighty Maker, who the Law devisèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for thy forefathers, he whose will ye wot</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and lacking whom had many been baptizèd?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">I wake for thee, for me dost sleep, thou sot?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Then by the Future soon shalt be advisèd</span>
          <br>
          <span>how these new-comers come with bane and ban</span>
          <br>
          <span>to break the laws I taught to seely man.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Until this feeble folk full force hath won,<span class="linenum">50</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">contrive resistance in all manner o’ ways;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for, easy ’tis upon the rising Sun</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">firm eyne to fix sans fear of blinding rays:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But, when to zenith hath his race been run</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the strongest eye-sight that would dare to gaze</span>
          <br>
          <span>remaineth dazed, and so shall ye remain</span>
          <br>
          <span>unless ye let them ere the root be tane.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_306">[Pg 306]</span> Then with the Dreamer’s sleep away he speedeth:<span class="linenum">51</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Trembling remains th’ astonisht Hagarene;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">springing from couch his slaves bring light he biddeth,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the fervid venom fest’ering in his spleen.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">As the pale dawn-light, which the sun precedeth,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">display’d her angel-cheek and brow serene,</span>
          <br>
          <span>convoked the Doctors of the turpid sect,</span>
          <br>
          <span>he of his vision renders ’count direct.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Divers opinions couchèd contrary<span class="linenum">52</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">are told and heard as each best understood:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Astute waylayings, argute treachery,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">were workt and woven in their vengeful mood:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But shirking treason which may danger dree,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they sought the spilling of the Strangers’ blood</span>
          <br>
          <span>with plots and projects of the subtlest school,</span>
          <br>
          <span>by bribes the Rulers of the Land to rule.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>With golden bribe, rich fee, and secret gift,<span class="linenum">53</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they strive the country-principals to please;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">showing with proofs discreet of not’able drift,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">how shall perdition all the people seize;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“These be,” they say, “a folk of scanty thrift,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">rovers who run from occidental seas,</span>
          <br>
          <span>pyratick rapine is their sole design,</span>
          <br>
          <span>sans Roy, sans Loy, or human or divine.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_307">[Pg 307]</span> Ah! how behooves the King, who rules aright,<span class="linenum">54</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to choose his counc’illors or his friends belovèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by rule of conscience, Virtue’s inner light,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose sprites sincere affection long have provèd!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The man exalted to that dizzy height,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the kingly throne, of things from note removèd</span>
          <br>
          <span>can gain no notice sure, no knowledge clear,</span>
          <br>
          <span>save what th’ adviser’s tongue will teach his ear.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Much less I counsel Kings to rest secure<span class="linenum">55</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in the clear conscience of the men who show</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of humble pauper cloak the form of lure;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Ambition haply lurketh rags below:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">And men in all things pious, just, and pure,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">often of worldly knowledge little know;</span>
          <br>
          <span>for ill shall trustful Innocence take part</span>
          <br>
          <span>in mundane matters, when God holds the heart.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But each and ev’ery Cat’ual gross in greed,<span class="linenum">56</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the puissant rulers of the Gentile herd,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">gained by the glozings of the hellish breed,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">unto the Portingalls dispatch defer’d.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Whereon the Gama,—whose one only heed</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">despite the mischief by the Moormen stir’d,</span>
          <br>
          <span>was at the kingly feet sure sign to lay</span>
          <br>
          <span>of the discover’d World left far away:—</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_308">[Pg 308]</span> Worketh for this alone, as well he knew<span class="linenum">57</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that, when sure tidings and clear proofs appear,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">arms, armour, ships, and men would send anew</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Mano’el, the King who rules the Realm sans peer;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that to his yoke and law he would subdue</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the globèd earth, and e’en the wat’ery sphere;</span>
          <br>
          <span>himself was nothing but the dil’igent hand</span>
          <br>
          <span>that pioneer’d the road to Orient-land.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The Géntoo Monarch forth he fares to find,<span class="linenum">58</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that with dismissal he may wend his ways;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">seeing already how the Moor’s black mind</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">would baulk his heart’s desire by long delays.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The King, who if by tales of forgèd kind</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">amazèd were, ’twould not so much amaze,</span>
          <br>
          <span>confiding fully in his Augurs’ troth,</span>
          <br>
          <span>confirmèd too by Moormen’s wordy froth:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Feels Fear a-freezing his ignoble breast:<span class="linenum">59</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Burneth on other hand a base desire,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which ever held his spirit in arrest,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">flaming with Lucre-lust’s unquench’able Fire:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The richest profit sees he manifest</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">appear in future, if with truth entire,</span>
          <br>
          <span>he make just contract and its cons’equent gain,</span>
          <br>
          <span>for long years offered by our Lusian Reign.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_309">[Pg 309]</span> Hereon the counc’illors whom the King most
            prizèd<span class="linenum">60</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">different counsels and opinions dealt;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for those whereby he wont to be advisèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">money’s almighty magick might had felt.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">To call our valiant Captain he devisèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and him when come thus spake:—“Now, an thou wilt</span>
          <br>
          <span>here in my presence own the nude clean truth,</span>
          <br>
          <span>thy felon actions still shall claim my ruth:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“The message, say they and I understand,<span class="linenum">61</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thy King hath sent me, is a falsehood vain;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">no King doth own thee, ownest thou no land,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but leadest vaguing life upon the Main:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Say! who from ultimate Hispanian strand,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">or King or Lord past hope of cure insane</span>
          <br>
          <span>would send his navies or one ship to stray</span>
          <br>
          <span>over such distant Ocean’s dubious way?</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And if great wealthy kingdoms doth thy King<span class="linenum">62</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sway, as thou say’est with kingly majesty,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">what rich rare presents do I see thee bring</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">earnests of doubtful unknown verity?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The splendid robe, the costly offering</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">betwixt high King and King link amity:</span>
          <br>
          <span>I hold no valid sign, no certain pledge,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the pleas a vagrant seaman may allege.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_310">[Pg 310]</span> “If as hath hapt to many a high-born Brave,<span class="linenum">63</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">perchance in exile be your lot to roam,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">my land shall lend you refuge and shall save;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for ev’ery country is the strong man’s home:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">If ye be Pyrats housed upon the wave,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">own it me, fear nor infamy nor doom;</span>
          <br>
          <span>for in all ages life to save must be</span>
          <br>
          <span>the primal law of life’s necessity.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>He thus: The Gama, who divin’d the game<span class="linenum">64</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">perfidious, with a cunning treason play’d</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by jealous Mahometick hearts, whence came</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the foul suspicions which the King misled:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">With high-soul’d confidence, as did beseem,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">commanding credence which he merited,</span>
          <br>
          <span>bowing to Venus Acidalia’s hest</span>
          <br>
          <span>proffered this answer from his prudent breast:—</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“If man’s orig’inal Sin in hoary Time,<span class="linenum">65</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whereby sore fall became our hapless fate,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">had never caused the cup of deadly crime,—</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that cruel scourge of every Christian state,—</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with enmity to brim in every clime</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for Adam’s sons with falsity innate</span>
          <br>
          <span>(O King sublime!) of that foul turpid sect,</span>
          <br>
          <span>ne’er hadst thou held me of such deed suspect.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_311">[Pg 311]</span> “But, sithence nought is won or good or high<span class="linenum">66</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sans stumbling-blocks, and sees each nobler deed</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on fair Hope’s footstep Fear aye following nigh,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which on its bosom-sweat delights to feed;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">meseems thou deignest little to rely</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on this my very truth, nor takest heed</span>
          <br>
          <span>of other reasons, which regard thou must</span>
          <br>
          <span>didst thou not trust to men unworthy trust.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“For, an I be a Robber rapine-fed,<span class="linenum">67</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">undivagous, far banisht from mine own,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">how can I, thinkest thou, so far have sped</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to seek these seats unseen, these realms unknown?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">By what false Hope, what love of profit led</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">should I ’mid angry seas my lot have thrown,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Antarctick rigours and the fires of air,</span>
          <br>
          <span>which they who dwell beneath the Ram must bear?</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“If thou demand that gifts of high degree<span class="linenum">68</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">must the good credit of my words maintain,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">I came but stranger climes and skies to see</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where Nature chose to set thine antient reign:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But if my Fortune grant such good to me</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">home to return and Fatherland regain,</span>
          <br>
          <span>By rich and splendid presents thou shalt learn</span>
          <br>
          <span>the ’assurèd tidings of my glad return.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_312">[Pg 312]</span> “If this my visit Chance inop’inate seem,<span class="linenum">69</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that King should send from far Hesperian strand,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">know that yon noble heart and bosom deem</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">no geste, no poss’ible feat too great and grand.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Well seems it fitting, that the thought supreme</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Lusian spirit should at least command</span>
          <br>
          <span>larger belief and faith of loft’ier flight,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and hold it boundless in its height and might.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Know that long ages passèd, since our old<span class="linenum">70</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Kings with a settled purpose ’gan propose</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to conquer toils and travails manifold,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which aye to noble plans their pow’er oppose.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">They opèd hostile seas that fain withhold</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from mortal man the boon of soft repose;</span>
          <br>
          <span>they willed to trace their bounds, to track their shore,—</span>
          <br>
          <span>the farthest margent where their billows roar.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Conceit right worthy of his branch so blest<span class="linenum">71</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that vent’urous King,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-26" id="noteref-26">[26]</a> who plowed
            in primal rank</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the waves and drave from out his well-loved nest</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the last possessor of Mount Ab’yla’s flank:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">He by rare Genius, toils that never rest,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">unto one plank conjoining other plank,</span>
          <br>
          <span>disclosed the parts, where shine in clearest air</span>
          <br>
          <span>Argo with Hydra, Ara with the Hare.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-27" id="noteref-27">[27]</a></span>
</p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_313">[Pg 313]</span> “These early seeds abundant harvest bore,<span class="linenum">72</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and waxt our bosoms braver till we came</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">little by little stranger paths t’ explore,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">devel’oping each an antecedent aim:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The latest dwellers on the Blackmoor shore</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Austral, whose eyne ne’er saw the Sev’enfold Flame,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-28" id="noteref-28">[28]</a></span><br>
          <span>were seen by us when left behind in turn</span>
          <br>
          <span>whatever peoples ’neath the Tropick burn.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Thus with firm bosom, fixt resolve to win,<span class="linenum">73</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">we vanquisht Fortune and we snatcht the prize,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">till harbour’d this thy new-found kingdom in</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">we taught the crowning Column here to rise:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Cleaving perforce clean through the liquid tin,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">horrible Tempests’ importunities,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to thee we come, and only pray from thee</span>
          <br>
          <span>some sign and signal which our King shall see.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“This, King, be truth: Nor deem that I would make,—<span class="linenum">74</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for such uncertain good, such petty gain,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which, b’eing my words untrue, mote be the stake,—</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">such long proëmium forgèd, false and vain.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Liefer would I my rest unending take</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on the fierce restless bosom of the Main</span>
          <br>
          <span>by mother Thetis rockt, a Pyrat dour</span>
          <br>
          <span>who makes his wealth by making others poor.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_314">[Pg 314]</span> “If then, Oh King! this honest truth of mine<span class="linenum">75</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thou take for what it is, one-fold, sincere,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">aid us, to our despatch thy heart incline</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and gust of glad return to mar forbear.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But an my tale appear some feigned design,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">heed thou my pleadings proved so fair and clear,</span>
          <br>
          <span>as seen by Judgment-lights that never fail,</span>
          <br>
          <span>for Truth is strong and Truth shall aye prevail.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Th’ attentive Monarch felt assured content<span class="linenum">76</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when thus Da Gama provèd his discourse:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Conceives in him reliance confident,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and the firm trust that lent his language force:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">He weighs of every word the full intent</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">pond’ering the pleading from such trusty source;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and ’gins to hold as men by self deceivèd</span>
          <br>
          <span>those caitiff Cat’uals who had bribes receivèd.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Jointly his lucre-lust claims firm effect,<span class="linenum">77</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which Lusian contract shall he hopes ensure;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Hope bids him listen, and far more affect</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Captain’s honour than the crafty Moor:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">In fine he biddeth Gama hie direct</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">aboard, and thence from hurt and harm secure</span>
          <br>
          <span>the fittest stuffs for traffick shoreward send</span>
          <br>
          <span>against his spicey stores to truck or vend.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_315">[Pg 315]</span> The stuffs to send, in fine, he gives command,<span class="linenum">78</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which in Gangetick realms the rarest be</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">if aught of value brought he from the land,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where ends the shore and where begins the sea.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Now from the Royal presence venerand</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Captain seeks the port to make his plea</span>
          <br>
          <span>before the Cat’ual honored with his charge,</span>
          <br>
          <span>for loan of boat as his were all at large.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>For boat whereby to board his ship he pleadeth:<span class="linenum">79</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Yet the bad Regent plotting novel snare</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wherein to ’trap the stranger, nought concedeth,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but stay and hindrance straightway doth prepare;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Then, faring from the quay, his Guest he leadeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">far from the royal Palaces; and there,</span>
          <br>
          <span>where kens the Monarch nought of such intent,</span>
          <br>
          <span>would work the mischief which his malice meant.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>When reached the distant site, he ’gan to say<span class="linenum">80</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">fitting conveyance should be soon supplied,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">or to the dawning of the crastine day</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the passage to defer he best decide.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But now perceivèd from prolonged delay</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Gama how the Géntoo was allied</span>
          <br>
          <span>with the deep-plotting Moors’ revengeful brood,</span>
          <br>
          <span>a truth he had not hereto understood.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_316">[Pg 316]</span> This Cat’ual also gifts and bribes had tane,<span class="linenum">81</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">tempted like others by the Moslem folk;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">eke was he chief who held the guiding rein</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of all the cities ’neath the Samo’rim’s yoke:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">From him alone the Moormen looked to gain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">their base and wicked wills by hook or crook:</span>
          <br>
          <span>He, who in concert vile with them conspires,</span>
          <br>
          <span>despaireth not to glut their ill desires.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>To him the Gama with much instance prays<span class="linenum">82</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for passage shipward, but without avail;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for thus had order given, as he says,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the proud successor of the Perimal.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“What cause of hindrance here, why these delays</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to land the stuffs and goods of Portugal?</span>
          <br>
          <span>Subjects perforce obey what Kings command</span>
          <br>
          <span>who dares their dreadful orders countermand?”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>That bribed Cat’ual lent no heed as due<span class="linenum">83</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to the high words; nay more he rackt his thought</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to find some subtle phantasy and new,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">some deep and devilish scheme, some monstr’ous plot;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">or how his brutal steel he might imbrue</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in that detested blood he ever sought;</span>
          <br>
          <span>or how the vessels he might blast and burn</span>
          <br>
          <span>that none and nought therein may home return.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_317">[Pg 317]</span> That none to Fatherland return intendeth,<span class="linenum">84</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and nothing less, the Moslems’ fiendish plan;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">so ne’er shall ken how far and wide extendeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Th’ Eöan land our sovran Lusitan.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">In fine goes not the Gama whom forfendeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of those barbarian hordes the ruling man;</span>
          <br>
          <span>lacking whose permit none might leave the beach</span>
          <br>
          <span>as all the boats were borne beyond his reach.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>To the Chief’s reasons and rough words replieth<span class="linenum">85</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that Idol-worshipper, he must command</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to bring near shore the Fleet that distant lieth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">so mote it easier be to board and land:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“Of foe or thief the tactick it implieth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when in far offing thus the vessels stand,”</span>
          <br>
          <span>quoth he, “for ne’er shall true and trusty friend</span>
          <br>
          <span>from those he loveth danger apprehend.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Shrewd Gama seeth in each wily word<span class="linenum">86</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Cat’ual’s drift, who fain would bring the Fleet</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">nearer, where dire assault of flame and sword</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">were ready made for wreaking mortal hate.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">His thoughts he scatters better aid t’ afford:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">He seeks in Fancy’s realm some cure discreet</span>
          <br>
          <span>some counterplot ’gainst evil plans preparèd;</span>
          <br>
          <span>in fine he fearèd all, for all he carèd.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_318">[Pg 318]</span> As beam reflected by the burnisht bright<span class="linenum">87</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">mirror of steel, or glass-plate chrystal-clear,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which sometime struck by ray of solar light</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in other part re-strikes the dazzling glare;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and waved by wanton hand of curious Spright</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">about the house to sparkle here and there,</span>
          <br>
          <span>o’er walls and roofs the shimm’ering species plays,</span>
          <br>
          <span>nor rest its trem’ulous, fitful, quiv’ering rays.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>So did his vaguing judgment fluctuate<span class="linenum">88</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when captive Gama’s mem’ory brought to mind</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Coelho, lest he peradventure wait</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ashore with boats as by command design’d:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">With message priv’ily sent he warned his mate</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">fast for the Fleet his homeward way to find,</span>
          <br>
          <span>lest he fall lightly in the bitter lace</span>
          <br>
          <span>he feared, the fierce fell work of Moorish race.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Such should be he who would, by grace of Mart,<span class="linenum">89</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">follow th’ illustrious and their fame outvie:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">His nimble thought must fly to every part,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">see through, and ’scape the danger ere ’tis nigh.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">His soldier-instinct rare, and subtle art</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">must read, mark, learn his baffled enemy;</span>
          <br>
          <span>note all in fine; nor shall that Captain’s lot</span>
          <br>
          <span>be praise of mine, who pleads <i>I thought it not!</i></span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_319">[Pg 319]</span> Insists the Malabar his guest remain<span class="linenum">90</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">pris’oner, till orders bring th’ Armada near;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he constant, firèd with hot high disdain,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">hears eve’ry menace with unfrighten’d ear;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">rather shall he the weight on self sustain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which vilest malice born of hate and fear</span>
          <br>
          <span>machinates, than to shade of risk expose</span>
          <br>
          <span>his Liege’s navy riding safe from foes.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>That livelong night in durance vile he lies,<span class="linenum">91</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and of next day a part, when he ordains</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">once more to see the King: But leave denies</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Guard that not a few of men contains.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">To tempt with other tricks the Géntoo tries,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">fearing his Monarch pay him for his pains,</span>
          <br>
          <span>when shown the malice which must soon be known,</span>
          <br>
          <span>if there a longer time the stranger wone.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>He bids him order ev’ery stuff be brought<span class="linenum">92</span></span><br>
          <span class="i2">straight shoreward, all he hath of vendible,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that they might duly barter’d be or bought;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for who nills commerce war is wont to will.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Though knows the Gama what felonious thought</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and damnable desires that bosom fill,</span>
          <br>
          <span>yet he consenteth, for right well knows he</span>
          <br>
          <span>with these same stuffs he buys his liberty.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_320">[Pg 320]</span> Concert they now the Blackmoor shall prepare<span class="linenum">93</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">launches and lighters fit the wares to land;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to trust his boats our Captain did not care,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where fone might capture or might hold in hand.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Put forth th’ almádies for the beach to bear</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Hispanian stuffs, the best he mote command:</span>
          <br>
          <span>He writes his brother fearing all delay</span>
          <br>
          <span>to send the bales that shall his blackmail pay.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The merchandise now landed is ashore,<span class="linenum">94</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where by that greedy Catual ’tis tane:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Alvaro and Diogo guard the store,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with leave to truck or vend as best they can.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">That more than duty, than obedience more,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Gain rules th’ ignoble breast of lawless man</span>
          <br>
          <span>well doth that Pagan to the worldling show;</span>
          <br>
          <span>for gained the goods he let the Gama go:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>He lets him go, for in the goods he thought<span class="linenum">95</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to hold sufficient pledge and pawn that may</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a better penny to his purse be brought,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">than if for longer time our Chief he stay:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The Gama, certain that no more he ought</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to land, and haply ’counter fresh delay,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and to his vessels being now restor’d,</span>
          <br>
          <span>resolves with tranquil mind to bide aboard.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_321">[Pg 321]</span> Aboard the ships he bides with mind at ease<span class="linenum">96</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">till seen what circumstance the days shall show;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for now his spirit no reliance sees</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">upon that bribèd Regent vile and low.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here let the Casuist who riddle rees,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">see how the wealthy as the wantful too,</span>
          <br>
          <span>are ruled by lucre and the noxious thirst</span>
          <br>
          <span>of gain that gars us dare and do the worst.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>By Thracia’s Sovran Polydore is slain,<span class="linenum">97</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">only to have and hold his wealthy store;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the guarded edifice may not contain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Acrisius’ daughter ’gainst the golden shower;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">so raged Tarpeia’s avarice insane</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that she in truck for shining yellow ore,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the lofty towers to the foe betrayeth,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and stifled, crusht, the price of treason payeth.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>This opes of warded Fort the valvarte-wall,<span class="linenum">98</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">maketh the felon friend his faith forego:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">This changeth noblest Thane to vilest Thrall</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and yieldeth Captains to the luring foe:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">This maketh purest maiden foully fall,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and know no fear, no reck of Honour trow:</span>
          <br>
          <span>This Art and Science shall at times deprave,</span>
          <br>
          <span>blind sanest judgment, consciences enslave:</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_322">[Pg 322]</span> This loves to gloss with subtler sense than
            meant<span class="linenum">99</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Texts: This maketh Laws and Laws unmaketh:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">This tainteth subjects with a traitor-taint:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">This in the patriot King the tyrant waketh.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">E’en he, self-vowèd to th’ Omnipotent,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as proved by thousand instances, forsaketh</span>
          <br>
          <span>God’s way by Gold’s enchanting Siren woo’d;</span>
          <br>
          <span>yet haply showing still some tint of good.</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>
    </section>
    <section id="canto-viii-endnotes">

      <h3>Canto VIII. Endnotes.</h3>

      <ol start="16">
        <li id="note-16">
          <p>Spurius Posthumius. <a href="#noteref-16" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-17">
          <p>Slain at the capture of Lisbon. <a href="#noteref-17" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-18">
          <p>Now Saint. <a href="#noteref-18" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-19">
          <p>“Sans-peur,” who captured Evora. <a href="#noteref-19" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-20">
          <p>D. Pedro Fernandez de Castro. <a href="#noteref-20" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-21">
          <p>Grand Master of Sant’Iago (Stanza 26). <a href="#noteref-21" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-22">
          <p>Fernam Martinez de Santarem, Vasco Yannes and Gonçalo Ribeiro (Stanza 27). <a href="#noteref-22" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-23">
          <p>Paio Rodriguez Marinho. <a href="#noteref-23" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-24">
          <p>P. de Menezes, first Governor of Ceuta. <a href="#noteref-24" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-25">
          <p>His son, D. Duarte, who saved D. Afonso V. <a href="#noteref-25" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-26">
          <p>D. Joam I. <a href="#noteref-26" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-27">
          <p>Southern Constellations. <a href="#noteref-27" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-28">
          <p>Ursa Major. <a href="#noteref-28" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </section>
  </section>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

  <section id="canto-ix">
    <p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_323">[Pg 323]</span></p>
    <h2>Canto IX.</h2>

    <section id="canto-ix-argument">

      <h3>Argument<br>
        of the Ninth Canto.</h3>

      <p>Now, free’d from the snares and perils which threatened him,
        Vasco da Gama quitteth Calecut, and returneth to the Kingdom
        (Portugal), with the glad tidings of having discovered Oriental
        India: Venus directeth his course to a delicious Island: Description
        of that same Island: Landing of the Navigators: Festive
        shows wherewith they are there received; the soldiers by the
        Nereids and Da Gama by Thetis (<i>sic</i>).</p>
    </section>
    <section id="canto-ix-another-argument">

      <h3>Another Argument.</h3>

      <blockquote class="poetry italics" lang="pt"><div>

        <p>
          <span>Parte de Calecut o Lusitano,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Com as alegres novas do Oriente,</span>
          <br>
          <span>E no meio do tumido Oceano,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Venus lhe mostra huma Insula excellente:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Aqui de todo bem soffrido dano,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Acha repouso assaz conveniente,</span>
          <br>
          <span>E com Nymphas gentis o mais do dia</span>
          <br>
          <span>Em festas passa, e jogos de alegria.</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>

      <table class="table-poetry">
        <tbody>
          <tr>
            <td>Fareth from Calecut the Capitayne</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(1–16)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Bearing glad tidings of the Orient;</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>To whom, amiddle of the tumid Main,</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(17–63)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Venus displays an Island excellent:</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Here from all nobly suffered loss and pain,</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(64–82)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Rest and Repose they find convenient,</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>And with the gentle Nymphs the livelong day</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(83–95)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>They pass in wassail, and in Love’s fair play.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>
    </section>
    <section id="canto-ix-body">

      <p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_326"></a><a id="Page_327"></a>[Pg 327]</span></p>
      <h3>Canto IX.</h3>

      <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

        <p>
          <span>Within the City long remainèd pent<span class="linenum">1</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">nor found a purchaser our Factor-twain:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The wily Infidels by foil and feint</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">made every trader cease from trade and gain:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">For all they purposèd, and hoped, and meant,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">was there the stout Discov’erers to detain</span>
          <br>
          <span>of India, till arrive th’ expected Fleet</span>
          <br>
          <span>of Mecan vessels and the foe defeat.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>There, where the City crowns the Red Sea bight<span class="linenum">2</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">founded by Egypt’s royal Ptolemy,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and from his sister-spouse Arsin’oe hight,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to Suez changèd in our modern day;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the harbour lieth at a distance light</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from far-famed Meca, raised to high degree</span>
          <br>
          <span>by the false superstition and profane,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Holy Water of the Moorish men.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-29" id="noteref-29">[29]</a></span>
</p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_328">[Pg 328]</span> Gidà the hythe is ’titled, where the trade<span class="linenum">3</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of all the Red Sea shore-lands flourisht most,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whereby was great and grateful gain convey’d</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">unto the Sóldan,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-30" id="noteref-30">[30]</a> who possest the
            coast:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Hence to the Malabars, by contract made</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with th’ Infidel, tall ships, a potent host,</span>
          <br>
          <span>each year fares sailing over Indic seas</span>
          <br>
          <span>stocking their teeming holds with spiceries.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Upon these ships firm hopes the Moors had set,<span class="linenum">4</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">e’en as their puissance was so much the higher,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that these who sought their gains so grateful great,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they might consume with crepitating fire:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">For the good succour all confiding wait,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and from th’ Explorers naught they now require,</span>
          <br>
          <span>save to retard their sailing in such sort,</span>
          <br>
          <span>that the famed Meca-fleet should make the port.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But He who rules the Heav’ens and human race,<span class="linenum">5</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who for whatever willèd hath His will,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the fittest causes from afar doth trace</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which shall His provident effects fulfil;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">pitiful accidents of ruth and grace</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">dealt to Monsaydé, who, with guarded skill,</span>
          <br>
          <span>devoted self Da Gama to advise,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and gain his rightful guerdon,—Paradise.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_329">[Pg 329]</span> He, whom the Moorish rout might not suspect,<span class="linenum">6</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">being like them a Moor, but firmly thought</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a villain member of the villain sect,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">unveiled the frauds with foulest treason fraught:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The ships by distance from the shore protect,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in stealth with pious heart full oft he sought,</span>
          <br>
          <span>mourning the causeless evils that ordain</span>
          <br>
          <span>malignant hate and vengeance Sarracen.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>He warns the wary Gama that th’ Armade<span class="linenum">7</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">due from Arabian Meca year by year,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">is that whereon his fellows’ hope is laid,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to be the deadly arm of certain snare:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“They sail with armed hosts amain,” he said,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“and Vulcan’s horrid thunderbolts they bear;</span>
          <br>
          <span>So may ye read’ily fall an easy prey</span>
          <br>
          <span>as you be poorly furnisht for the fray!”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>And eke the Gama, now considering<span class="linenum">8</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the time had come for him to quit the Port,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and that no gladder tidings from the King</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he could expect who doth the Moors support;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Factors left ashore straight summoning,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he bade them haste aboard: And, lest report</span>
          <br>
          <span>of such a flitting might their flight impede,</span>
          <br>
          <span>he bids them privily their steps to speed.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_330">[Pg 330]</span> But in the shortest space had Rumour flown<span class="linenum">9</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on res’onant wing, nor here as wont did lie,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that both the Factors were in prison thrown,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when found attempting from the town to fly.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Without delay the true report was known</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to the shrewd Captain, who incont’inently</span>
          <br>
          <span>reprisals dealt on certain who had sought</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Fleet to traffick with the gems they brought.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Now those detained are merchants grave and old,<span class="linenum">10</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">richards of Calecut in good repute;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and in their absence all their brethren hold</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the ships withhold them and full true the bruit.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But in the Fleet our Mar’iners brave and bold</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the capstans man, and each in several suit</span>
          <br>
          <span>is told to task; these haul the cables in,</span>
          <br>
          <span>those with hard breasts to shove the bars<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-31" id="noteref-31">[31]</a>
            begin.</span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span>Others to yard-arms hanging on let go<span class="linenum">11</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the sail that bellies with a bell’owing sound;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">yet the King heareth louder sounds which show</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that fast the Squadron fareth homeward-bound:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The wives and children, dight to die of woe</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for their lost loved ones, crowd in tears around</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Samorim, and piteously complain</span>
          <br>
          <span>from these their fathers, mates from those are tane.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_331">[Pg 331]</span> Forthwith the Lusian Factors he restoreth<span class="linenum">12</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with stuffs in fullest tale and all-tax free,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">despite the rancorous Moor who all abhorreth,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">so might the prison’d lieges renderèd be:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Pardon for his deceit the King imploreth.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The Captain greeteth, far more glad to see</span>
          <br>
          <span>Factors than phrases hear; sets loose some Blacks</span>
          <br>
          <span>and, making sail, adown the coast he tacks.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Down coast he tacketh, for he comprehendeth<span class="linenum">13</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that with the Géntoo King ’twere labour vain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to knit those peaceful bonds, which he intendeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">should strengthen commerce and her object gain:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But seeing how the glorious Realm that trendeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Aurora-ward, must aye well-known remain,</span>
          <br>
          <span>with these glad news he seeks dear Fatherland,</span>
          <br>
          <span>sure tokens taking of what things he fand.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>He taketh eke some Malabars aboard<span class="linenum">14</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">parforce, the fellows by the Samorim sent</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when were the Factor-pris’oners restor’d:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Of purchased stores he taketh hot piment:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Nor is of Banda the dried flow’er<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-32" id="noteref-32">[32]</a> ignor’d,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">nutmeg and swarthy clove, which excellent</span>
          <br>
          <span>makes new Malucan Isle,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-33" id="noteref-33">[33]</a>
            with cinnamon</span>
          <br>
          <span>the wealth, the boast, the beauty of Ceylon.</span>
</p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_332">[Pg 332]</span> All this was gathered by the deft design<span class="linenum">15</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of true Monsaydé, borne aboard the Fleet:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who thus of Angel-influences digne</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">is register’d in <span class="smcap">Christ</span> His roll-call
            writ:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Blest African! whom clemency divine</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in prison-gloom with Gospel-light hath lit,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who thus couldst find, from country forced to roam,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the way to mortal man’s true heav’enly home!</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Then turning from that coast of torrid heat<span class="linenum">16</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the vent’urous Prores their southing courses bend,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where Nature pleased to place her farthest mete,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Good Hope Cape, where Austrine shorelands end;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">bearing the joyful news, and hopes to greet</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">their Lisbon homes from Morning-land they wend,</span>
          <br>
          <span>again resigned to snares of terror spread</span>
          <br>
          <span>by seas uncertain, glad, withal in dread:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The joy one’s own dear Land once more to view,<span class="linenum">17</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sweet home and kith and kin to sight again,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with whom old voyage-feats we face anew,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and tell of climates strange and stranger men;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to taste the honey’d draught of praises due</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by long mischances, toil, and ill and pain,</span>
          <br>
          <span>each hath of pleasure such a perfect store,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the shallow vessel of man’s heart brims o’er.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_333">[Pg 333]</span> Natheless the Cyprian goddess, who ordainèd<span class="linenum">18</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">had been her Lusitanian sons to guard;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and by the Sire Eterne had been constrainèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">through rolling years to lend them watch and ward;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Glory gallant toils and travails gainèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the weals that nobly suffered ills reward,</span>
          <br>
          <span>for them ordaining was, who did intend</span>
          <br>
          <span>all their sea-sorrows in sea-joys should end.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>In thought revolving for a season brief<span class="linenum">19</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">how they had faced the might’iest Sea that flows;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and thinking how the God sore gall and grief</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">worked, who in Amphionean Thebæ rose;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">she had already planned right glad relief</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a prize outweighing all their passing woes,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to find them rare delight and gentle rest</span>
          <br>
          <span>deep in the liquid chrystal’s tranquil breast:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Something, in fine, of that repose so sweet,<span class="linenum">20</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">refocillating bodies weary-wan,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for these her wanderers, and pay interest meet</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of toil, that short’eneth life of short-lived Man.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Then to secure the ear it seemèd fit</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of her Son-god, whose might of Gram’arye can</span>
          <br>
          <span>degrade the high Divine to low terrene,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and raise our human clay to Heav’en serene.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_334">[Pg 334]</span> And, duly pond’ering, all her thoughts incline<span class="linenum">21</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">there to bespread upon their wat’ery way,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’mid waves of Ocean-stream, some Isle divine</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with bloom enamel’d and with green’ery gay;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for she hath many, where her realms confine</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with the First Mother<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-34" id="noteref-34">[34]</a> girt by
            ’bosoming bay,</span><br>
          <span>besides those Gardens of the Midland Seas,</span>
          <br>
          <span>within the portals oped by Hercules.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>There ’tis her will, the watery Damosels<span class="linenum">22</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">await the coming of her hero-train,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Nymphs who worth’ily bear the name of belles,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for eyne a pleasure and for hearts a pain;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with choirs and dances, and by potent spells</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">bring secret hoards of Love their love to gain,</span>
          <br>
          <span>that all should labour with the best of will</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Youths they love with lover-joys to thrill.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Erst so she schemèd for the son she bare<span class="linenum">23</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to her Anchises, that he welcome found</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in the fair country, where by subtle snare</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a single ox-hide spanned the spacious ground:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">She seeks his aidance whom she may not spare,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">fierce Cupid, in whose force her force is bound;</span>
          <br>
          <span>that e’en as in her olden enterprize</span>
          <br>
          <span>he aided, aid he now to pluck the prize.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_335">[Pg 335]</span> Yoked to her chariot are the Birds whose song<span class="linenum">24</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">doth exequies of Death in Life’s own tide,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and they whose figure took in syne gone long,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Peristera<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-35" id="noteref-35">[35]</a> who
            pluckt the daisies pied.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Behind the hasting Goddess troop the throng,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all through the lift with billing kisses glide:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Where’er on windy wings the Goddess flies</span>
          <br>
          <span>with gracious movement she serenes the skies.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Now o’er th’ Idalian mounts her car impendeth,<span class="linenum">25</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where for her coming waits her Archer-son,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who mustering potent host with it intendeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to fare on famous expedition,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and rebel worlds debel till he amendeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">those direful errors long by mortals done,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who love goods given by the Gods above</span>
          <br>
          <span>for man to use and not for man to love.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>He saw Actæon, hunter so austere,<span class="linenum">26</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">so blindly bent on snatching brutal prize,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that to pursue some ugly beast and fere,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">far from the human form divine he flies:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The Boy for vengeance sweet as ’tis severe</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">charms with chaste Dian’s shape his hungry eyes;</span>
          <br>
          <span>then let the for’ester take him careful heed</span>
          <br>
          <span>lest his loved Hounds upon their Hunter feed.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_336">[Pg 336]</span> He sees the wide world o’er how evry Lord,<span class="linenum">27</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for public welfare naught doth reck nor feel;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he sees that none the boon of love afford,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">save where Philautia<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-36" id="noteref-36">[36]</a> counsels
            selfish weal:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">He sees how men who sit at royal board</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for words of wisdom aye prefer to deal</span>
          <br>
          <span>in sale of flatt’eries vile, which ne’er permit</span>
          <br>
          <span>the tares be weeded from the fair young wheat.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>He sees that men, to poverty who owe<span class="linenum">28</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">duty of Holy Love and Charity,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">live only pow’er to gain and wealth to show,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">pretending Justice and Integrity:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Of ugly Tyr’anny breeding asp’erous woe</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they coin a right with vain severity:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Laws they devise in favour of the King;</span>
          <br>
          <span>Laws which the lieges favour down they fling,</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>He sees, in fine, none love as all should love,<span class="linenum">29</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">save that which dealeth only ill delight:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Nor for a longer time doth it behove</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to waive a punishment as dire as right.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">He bids his summoned Ministers to move</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">armaments, fitted for that mortal fight</span>
          <br>
          <span>he lists engage with yon misgovern’d crowd,</span>
          <br>
          <span>that hath till now allegiance disavow’d.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_337">[Pg 337]</span> Of these small wingèd Impes a band is set<span class="linenum">30</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to varied labours in their several crafts;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">these on the grindstone piercing piles to whet,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and those to shave and thin the caney shafts:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Soothes ev’ery labour love-sweet canzonet,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wedding strange chances to the song that wafts</span>
          <br>
          <span>sonorous melodies and roundels gay;</span>
          <br>
          <span>suave is the song, angelical the lay.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Th’ immortal Furnaces wherein they forgèd<span class="linenum">31</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for their swift arrows points that penetrate,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with fiery Hearts by way of fu’el are gorgèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and Vitals vital still that palpitate:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The temp’ering waves wherein the tips were mergèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">are lovers’ Tears in love unfortunate:</span>
          <br>
          <span>The live bright light and never-failing fire</span>
          <br>
          <span>is ever burning ne’er outburnt Desire.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Some hied their dext’erous hands to exercise<span class="linenum">32</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on the rude Vulgus’ hard unfeeling hearts:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Re-echo’d through the welkin frequent sighs</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of victims smitten by the shaft that smarts:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Fair be the Nymphs who deal the remedies</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">dear to the hurts they deal, and such their arts,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the sorely hurt not only they revive,</span>
          <br>
          <span>but boon of life to life unborn they give.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_338">[Pg 338]</span> Beauteous the many, while the few are plain,<span class="linenum">33</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">consonant with the qual’ity of the wound;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for to heal venom spread through ev’ery vein</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the bitter’est Theriacks oft the best are found.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Many are doomèd aye to wear the chain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by subtle bond of weirdest witch’ery bound:</span>
          <br>
          <span>thus haps it mostly, when the darts acerb</span>
          <br>
          <span>are armed and tinctured with the poyson-herb.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>And from such wilful shots discharged sans aim,<span class="linenum">34</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wherewith those awkward Impes aye joy to play,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">arise a thousand loves that mar and maim</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the victims wounded in such wretched way:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">E’en of the Heroes boasting highest fame</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a thousand impious loves the sight dismay;</span>
          <br>
          <span>Such was May Byblis, such the Cinyræan:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-37" id="noteref-37">[37]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span>This Youth Assyrian born, and that Judæan.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-38" id="noteref-38">[38]</a></span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span>Ye too, my Lordlings! oft have seen the hour<span class="linenum">35</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when love of Shepherd-lass your souls hath smit;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and ye, my Ladies! oft the couthless boor</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">hath meshed your Ladyships in Vulcan-net.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">These waiting nocturns to the tryst fain scour,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">those scale the casements and o’er pantiles flit:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Yet hold I mainly that such loves indign</span>
          <br>
          <span>are more the Mother’s than the Son’s design.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_339">[Pg 339]</span> Now the light char’iot on the green depose<span class="linenum">36</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the pure white Cygnets, slowly softly wending;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and Dionæa, who conjoinèd shows</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">roses in waste of snows, is seen descending.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Her Bowyer-son who dareth Heav’en oppose,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to greet her hasteth with douce smile unbending;</span>
          <br>
          <span>while of the little Cupid lads a band</span>
          <br>
          <span>crowdeth to kiss the Queen of Beauty’s hand.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>She, to save precious time from vanities,<span class="linenum">37</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whispers the Boy embosom’d in her arms</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">confident thus:—“Dear Son whose hand supplies</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the firmest footing of my chiefest charms;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Son! on whose pow’ers my power aye relies;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thou, holding cheap Typhœus’ dread alarms,</span>
          <br>
          <span>her force by thine t’ enforce, an urgent case</span>
          <br>
          <span>bringeth thy mother to bespeak thy grace.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“The Lusitanick toils well hast thou ken’d,<span class="linenum">38</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whom I for ages watch with tenderest guise.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Since sware the Parcæ unto me, their friend,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they shall adore my name, my favour prize;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and, as their feats of armèd prowess shend</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all feats of rival Rome, I lief devise</span>
          <br>
          <span>some mode of aidance in what things I may,</span>
          <br>
          <span>far as our force o’er man extendeth sway.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_340">[Pg 340]</span> “And, seen how hateful Bacchus hath beguile’d,<span class="linenum">39</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with mortal plots, their course on Indic plain,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and how by wavy Ocean’s injuries foil’d</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">rather than tirèd they were lost or slain:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">I will that in this sea to them so wild,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’mid ever restless waves their rest be tane:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Here shall they gather guerdon sweet and glorious</span>
          <br>
          <span>of toils that make the names of men memorious.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Wherefore I pray thee, Son! forthwith go fire<span class="linenum">40</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Nereus-maidens on their deep-sea ground;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">burn they with Lusian love, bring warm desire</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to these Explorers of a world new found,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all in an Islet joined in glorious choir,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">an Isle unknown in Ocean-depths profound</span>
          <br>
          <span>embowel’d, I will haste on high to raise</span>
          <br>
          <span>where lovely Flora with her Zephyr plays:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“There with a thousand sherbets, odorous wine,<span class="linenum">41</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">delicious viands, perfumed breath of roses,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in sing’ular scenes of palace chrystalline,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">fair couches, fairer what on couch reposes;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with thousand joys unvulgar shall, in fine,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">each Nymph await the Brave her fancy chooses</span>
          <br>
          <span>and all love-smitten, longing to bestow</span>
          <br>
          <span>what Hope can figure, or what eyes can show.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_341">[Pg 341]</span> “’Tis my good will that in the Neptune-reign,<span class="linenum">42</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">my place of birth, a fair brave race be born,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which a shrewd proof shall be to worlds malign,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and to the rebels who thine empire scorn;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that nought shall save, ne mure adamantine</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ne triste Hypocrisy, these men forsworn:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Ne’er shall these earth-things hope their selves to save</span>
          <br>
          <span>when burn immortal Love-fires ’neath the wave.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Thus willeth Venus and her wilful Boy<span class="linenum">43</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">obeys, and flies to see her will be done;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he bids them bring his bow of ivory,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with golden-headed arrows many a one:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The Cyprian with glad gest of wanton joy</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">within her chariot receives her son;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and slacks the bridles for the Birds whose song</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Phaëtonian death wailed loud and long.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But Cupid warneth that still wants their scheme<span class="linenum">44</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a famous Go-between of high degree</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who, though a thousand times she baulked his aim,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a thousand times firm friend prefer’d to be.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Gigantia was the Goddess, daring dame,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">vain-glorious, boastful, false and true was she</span>
          <br>
          <span>who sees with hundred eyne, flies every where</span>
          <br>
          <span>and that she sees a thousand tongues declare.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_342">[Pg 342]</span> They wend to seek and send her on in state,<span class="linenum">45</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to blow her trumpet of the clearest strain;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and so the wandering Braves to celebrate,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as never mortals could such praises gain:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Now Fame, with murm’uring sounds that penetrate,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">flies through the deepest grottos of the Main:</span>
          <br>
          <span>and scatt’ereth Truth believèd true to be;</span>
          <br>
          <span>for Fame’s own gossip is Credulity.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>These goodly lauds, and rumours excellent<span class="linenum">46</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the hearts of God and Goddess, whilom firèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by Bacchus and to harm the Heroes bent,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">changed and with something likest love inspirèd.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The fem’inine bosom, ever diligent</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in shifting will, of settled will soon tirèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span>now crieth cru’elty, shame and over zeal</span>
          <br>
          <span>for such high valour evil will to feel.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Meanwhile the lither Lad had loosed his bow<span class="linenum">47</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shaft urging shaft; loud groans from Ocean rise:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">They pierce point-blank the waves that restless flow</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">these straight, those whirling in a spiral guise:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The fair Nymphs fall and breathe the secret throe,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the ’bosomed burthen of their burning sighs;</span>
          <br>
          <span>each falls ere seen the face that makes her die,</span>
          <br>
          <span>for oft the ear hath loved before the eye.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_343">[Pg 343]</span> Now of his iv’ory Lune the cusps drew near,<span class="linenum">48</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with might and main th’ indomitable Boy,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who fired at Tethys more than any fair,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for-that was she to love the coyest coy.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Now of its arrows is the quiver bare,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">nor lives in sea-plain Nymph her life to ’joy;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and, if the wounded breathe a living breath</span>
          <br>
          <span>’tis but to savour that they strive with Death.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Give way, ye tall cerulean waves, give way!<span class="linenum">49</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for look ye, Venus brings her medicine,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">showing the snow-white belly’ing sails that stray</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">o’er swelling crests of billows Neptunine:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">That thou reciprocal response convey,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Oh ardent Love! to longings feminine,</span>
          <br>
          <span>an honest modesty must ne’er withstand</span>
          <br>
          <span>whatever Venus deigneth to command.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Now the fair Nereid-choir itself enrol’d;<span class="linenum">50</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and side by side the gentle bevy sped</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with tripping dances, usance known of old,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">straight for that Island whither Venus led:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">And there the Goddess ’gan to all unfold</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">her thousand feats of loving hardihed:</span>
          <br>
          <span>They, to be victims of sweet Love preparèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span>each trick would try and dare whate’er she darèd.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_344">[Pg 344]</span> Cutting the broad highway the vessels ride<span class="linenum">51</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">o’er ample Ocean seeking Home’s dear shore,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wishing but cool sweet water to provide</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for their long voyage briny waters o’er:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">When all attonce with start of joy descried</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Love’s Isle rise lovely stretched their eyes before,</span>
          <br>
          <span>as bursting radiant through the morning air</span>
          <br>
          <span>rose Memnon’s Mother delicately fair.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The bien and bonny Isle afar they hail,<span class="linenum">52</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by Venus wafted through the wavy flood,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">(e’en as the Zephyrs waft the snow-white sail)</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whither the sturdy Fleet fast sailing stood;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and lest unheeding pass the crews, and fail</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">there to take harbour as she willed they should,</span>
          <br>
          <span>right on their courses threw her lovely bower</span>
          <br>
          <span>that Acidalian of omnip’otent power.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Firm and immobile she disposed it where<span class="linenum">53</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">she saw the seamen seek and shape their way;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">so fixt stood Delos when Latona bare</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Phœbus and her who joys in forestry.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thither the hurrying Prores thro’ Ocean tare</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where bends the seaboard in a little bay</span>
          <br>
          <span>quiet and curved, upon whose snow-white sand</span>
          <br>
          <span>her rosy shells strewed Cytheréa’s hand.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_345">[Pg 345]</span> Three fairy hillocks threefold headlets showèd<span class="linenum">54</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">swelling superbly gracious to the sight,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose greeny clothing grass-enamel’d glowèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in that fair joyous Island of Delight:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">While glassy-clear three limpid fountains flowèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from peaks with gleaming verdure deckt and dight;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and from the milk-white rocks derivèd flow</span>
          <br>
          <span>fugitive wavelets, prattling as they go.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Down a sweet dale that dints the hillocks, glide<span class="linenum">55</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the sparkling waters to their trysting-place,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and make a table of so fair a tide;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">never could Fancy such a landskip trace:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">O’erhang it graceful groves on ev’ry side</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">like one who bendeth pranking form and face,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and in the chrystal mirror joys to view</span>
          <br>
          <span>his proper semblance and resemblance true.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Skywards a thousand trees rise tall and straight,<span class="linenum">56</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">apple’d with od’orous fruitage passing rare:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here th’ Orange painteth on her dainty freight</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the hues that burnt in Daphné’s burnisht hair:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Droops low crusht earthwards by her juicy weight,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Citron glowing with her saffron gear:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Lemons with scented spherelets deckt and drest</span>
          <br>
          <span>mock budding honours of the maiden’s breast.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_346">[Pg 346]</span> The forest-growths that clothe the hillocks
            trine<span class="linenum">57</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with frondent ringlets fronts and heads array;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Alcides’ Poplars with the Laurels twine</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">loved by the laurel’d fair-faxt Lord of Day:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and Cytheræa’s Myrtles with the Pine</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Cybelé, to strange amour a prey:</span>
          <br>
          <span>The spiring Cypress pointeth to the skies,</span>
          <br>
          <span>where man hath built his air-based Paradise.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Pomona’s choicest gifts spontaneous grow,<span class="linenum">58</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and all in diff’erent taste and gust abound;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">no want of cult’uring hand these arbours know,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">withouten culture better fares the ground:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Cherries with Tyrian tincture purpled glow;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and Morus eke that mimicks Amor’s sound;</span>
          <br>
          <span>while from her patrial Persia-land the Pome<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-39" id="noteref-39">[39]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span>flourisheth fairer in her foreign home.</span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span>Gapes the Granado tints incarnadine<span class="linenum">59</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whereby, O Ruby! shent is all thy sheen;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’braced by her husband-Elm the happy Vine</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">beareth her berrièd birth, here red, there green.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">And ye, O Pears! if long your boughs design</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with luscious pyramids to deck the scene,</span>
          <br>
          <span>busk ye to ’dure what hurt and harm may wreak</span>
          <br>
          <span>to your soft flanks the Bird’s injurious beak.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_347">[Pg 347]</span> The gorgeous tapestry, rare colours blending<span class="linenum">60</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and robing rustick earth with rainbow dye,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">makes Achæmenia’s<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-40" id="noteref-40">[40]</a> webs the less
            resplending,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">yet softer shades on sombre vales to lie.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here the Cephisian flow’er<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-41" id="noteref-41">[41]</a> his
            head low bending</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">eyeth the lakelet lucid as the sky:</span>
          <br>
          <span>There Cinyras’ grandson-son<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-42" id="noteref-42">[42]</a> still bleeds in
            bloom,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and, Paphian goddess! still thou wail’st his doom.</span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span>’Twere hard, in sooth, to judge which case be true,<span class="linenum">61</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where sim’ilar splendours mantle earth and air,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">if fair Aurora lend the flow’ers her hue,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">or if the flowers lend her hues so fair.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">There Zephyr aided Flora to bestrew</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Vi’olet with colours Love-wan lovers wear;</span>
          <br>
          <span>with Iris red and freshest blooth of Rose,</span>
          <br>
          <span>which on the Damsel’s cheek all beauteous glows:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The snow-white Lily with the rory tear<span class="linenum">62</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Dawntide dripping, and the Mangerona:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-43" id="noteref-43">[43]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Letters on hyacinthine leaves appear,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Hyacinth loved by son of lone Latona:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Each fruit and flow’ering Daisy shows full clear,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that fain would Chloris rival with Pomona.</span>
          <br>
          <span>Then, if the Birds disport on airy wing</span>
          <br>
          <span>Earth has a joyaunce for each four-foot thing.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_348">[Pg 348]</span> Along the streamlet sings the snowy Swan,<span class="linenum">63</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">percht on her spraylet answereth Philomel:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Startled Actæon stands no more to scan</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his horny forehead where the waters well;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here the fast lev’ret flies the hunter-man</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from densest thicket, or the shy gazelle:</span>
          <br>
          <span>There hurrying homewards to her darling brood</span>
          <br>
          <span>the light-wing’d Birdie bears the grateful food.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>’Mid such a freshness swift-foot sprang aground<span class="linenum">64</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">our second Argonauts, far-left the Fleet,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where in the wood-depths willing to be found</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">strolled the fair Nymphs as though no fear they weet;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">These waked the Zitter’s soft pathetic sound,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">those made the Harp and Flute sing song as sweet;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and bearing golden bows appeared a few</span>
          <br>
          <span>the prey pursuing they did not pursue.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Thus taught their Tut’oress in such teaching wise,<span class="linenum">65</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to scatter careless o’er the hill and plain;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">so might the Barons see’ing a doubtful prize,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">first burn with hot desire the prize to gain.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Some maids whose natural charms the veil despise,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in pride of soveran Beauty justly vain,</span>
          <br>
          <span>casting all Art’s adulteries aside,</span>
          <br>
          <span>bathe their pure bodies in the pearly tide.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_349">[Pg 349]</span> But the stout seamen when their feet were set<span class="linenum">66</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ashore, all hastenèd to greet the strand;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">nor was there any who his ship had quit</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sans hopes of finding game upon the land:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">None think such game that needs ne springe ne net</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on those fair hillocks thus would come to hand;—</span>
          <br>
          <span>so bien, so bonny, so benign a prey</span>
          <br>
          <span>by Venus cast love-wounded in their way.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Some with the spingard armed and arbalest,<span class="linenum">67</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">hoping to slay the horny hart or hind,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in sombre bosques and valleys hotly prest,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">determined Vert and Venerie to find:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Others in shadows that high noon arrest</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from scorching verdant turf, to walk incline’d</span>
          <br>
          <span>along the gentle riv’ulet’s grassy reach,</span>
          <br>
          <span>o’er the white pebbles purling to the beach.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Begin with sudden start the Youths to ’spy<span class="linenum">68</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">variegate colours glance through greeny boughs;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">colours that catch the judgment of man’s eye</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as not of nat’ural bloom, ne flow’er, ne rose;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but fleecy laine and silk of diff’erent dye,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Dress, that with double force Desire endows,</span>
          <br>
          <span>wherein the human Rose herself enshrines,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and, Art enhancing Nature, brighter shines.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_350">[Pg 350]</span> Loud cries Velloso, marv’elling at the sight:<span class="linenum">69</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“My masters! wondrous game,” quoth he, “is this;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">if yet endure that olden Pagan rite,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Grove be sacred to the Goddesses:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here meet we more than what the human Sprite</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ever desirèd; and right well we wis</span>
          <br>
          <span>excellent wonders and great things here lie</span>
          <br>
          <span>by Nature veiled from Man’s imprudent eye.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Follow we fast these Goddesses, and speer<span class="linenum">70</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">an they be Fantasm or divine indeed!”</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thus he; and, fleeter than the fleet-foot deer,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all follow coursing o’er the riv’erine mead.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Between the branches flying Nymphs appear,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">haply with more of hurry than of speed;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and, slack’ening pace with shrieks and laughter gay,</span>
          <br>
          <span>each yields her graces as her greyhound’s prey.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>From this the breezes golden tresses blow,<span class="linenum">71</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from that the robe’s frail hem is reft aside:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">High burns Desire, enkindled by the snow</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of living loveliness so sudden ’spied.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">One falls apurpose, and her fall doth show</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by loving languor more than plaint or pride,</span>
          <br>
          <span>she wills her follower stumble, falling o’er</span>
          <br>
          <span>the lovely quarry on the pebbly shore.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_351">[Pg 351]</span> Others seek other places where the stream<span class="linenum">72</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">reveals of bathing Nymphs the secret charms:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who startled ’gin to fly with shriek and scream,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as though surprized by rude assault of arms.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">While others feigning to feel less esteem</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for fear and shame than force, veil false alarms,</span>
          <br>
          <span>plunge in the brake and give to greedy eyes</span>
          <br>
          <span>denied to grasping hands the goodly prize.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>That, who in hurry to resume contrives<span class="linenum">73</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the modesty that marks the Hunter-maid</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">hides in the wave her limbs; another strives</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to snatch the garment on the stream-bank laid.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Youngling there is who in the river dives</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all clad and booted (lest too long delay’d</span>
          <br>
          <span>by doffing garments he should miss the game),</span>
          <br>
          <span>to quench in water Love’s consuming flame.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>As Hound of Hunter, crafty beast and ware,<span class="linenum">74</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">taught cripples to retrieve from brook or tarn,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">seeing the steely tube upraised in air;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">cov’ering the well-known quarry, duck or hern;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ere heard the crack, uneath the sight to bear</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he plungeth, certain praise and prize to earn,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and swimmeth barking: Thus the Brave made free</span>
          <br>
          <span>to seize the Fair,—no Phœbus’ sister she!</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_352">[Pg 352]</span> Le’onard, a soldier whom good gifts adorn,<span class="linenum">75</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a knightly Belamour and delicate,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who was not once the prey of Cupid’s scorn,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but ever dree’d Love’s life-long spite and hate;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he, who so long believed he was not born</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to Love-luck being e’er unfortunate,</span>
          <br>
          <span>not that he held all Hope beyond his range</span>
          <br>
          <span>when Destiny shall deign his doom to change:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Here willed his Fortune, he should wing his way<span class="linenum">76</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">chasing the fairest Daughter of the Wave,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Ephýre, lief to make him dearly pay</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that which for giving Nature to her gave.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Spent by the race he stayed his steps to say:—</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“O thou too beauteous cruelty to crave,</span>
          <br>
          <span>when of my life the palm to thee is dight,</span>
          <br>
          <span>ah! wait this body since thou hast its sprite!”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“All rest of running weary, Nymph divine!<span class="linenum">77</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Each yields her wishes to her en’emy’s will;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Why to the wood alone fly only mine?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Who told thee I am I, who chase thee still?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">If told thee so mine angry doom malign,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which allwheres dogs me always to mine ill,</span>
          <br>
          <span>believe it not, e’en I when I believèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span>each hour a thousand times my heart deceivèd.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_353">[Pg 353]</span> “Tire not thyself, to tire me; for if I<span class="linenum">78</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">must chase those flying charms and chase in vain,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">such is my Fortune an thou wait and try</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">her will perverse shall never gar me gain.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Wait! if thou will I would again descry,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">what subtle mode of ’scape for thee remain,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and thou in fine shalt note, and fain confess so,</span>
          <br>
          <span><i>Tra la spiga e la man qual muro è messo</i>.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-44" id="noteref-44">[44]</a></span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span>“Ah, fly me not! E’en so may Time foot-fleet<span class="linenum">79</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ne’er from thy youthful beauties urge his flight!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">For only stay the twinkling of thy feet</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and thou shalt vanquish Fortune’s dure despight.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">What Emp’eror, nay what mighty Host dare meet</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the force array’d by Chance’s furious might,</span>
          <br>
          <span>which in whate’er I wished still hounds my way,</span>
          <br>
          <span>this canst thou do, thou only, an thou stay?</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Wouldst in my roll of foes thyself enrol?<span class="linenum">80</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">To back the stronger is not bravely done!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Wouldst steal my lib’eral heart that was so whole?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Loose it me then, the faster thou shalt run!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Burthens thee not this Soul, my mesquin Soul,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which in those threads of glancing gold bespun,</span>
          <br>
          <span>tangled thou bearest? or thus won the prize,</span>
          <br>
          <span>hast lightened Fortune which so heavy lies?</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_354">[Pg 354]</span> “In this sole Esp’erance thee, my Fair, I
            chase;<span class="linenum">81</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that or thou weary her sad load to bear;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">or haply shall thy Beauty’s magick grace</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">have power to change her sour malignant Star:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">And if thus change she, cease this useless race,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for Love shall smite thee, gentle Ladye fair:</span>
          <br>
          <span>And thou shalt wait when Love shall smite thee sore;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and if thou wait what wait I, want I more?”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>No longer fled the lovely Nymph, to play<span class="linenum">82</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">her sad pursuer’s heart, her pow’er to try;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as still to revel in the lovely lay</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which told the soldier’s loving agony:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Bending her brow that beamed a holy ray,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all bathed with sweetest smiles of gentle joy,</span>
          <br>
          <span>she falls a victim at the victor’s feet,</span>
          <br>
          <span>melted with purest love by dear defeat.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Ah me! what hungry kissings wake the wood!<span class="linenum">83</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">What choirs in suavest unison acclaim!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">What pretty pettings! What coy pettish mood</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which pleasant laughter presently became!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">What Morn and Noontide saw and understood,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as Venus joyed her lovers’ joys to ’flame,</span>
          <br>
          <span>were better far t’ experience not to judge,</span>
          <br>
          <span>yet judge it he whose Fate such boon shall grudge.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_355">[Pg 355]</span> This way in fine conform the fair and bright<span class="linenum">84</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Nymphs, and each Bride with love her Groom endowers,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all heads are crowned with chaplets of delight,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of bays and gold and amaranthine flowers:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Their soft white palms they prest in wedded plight:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">With formal phrase and stipulating powers</span>
          <br>
          <span>that pledge for endless time their mutual Faith,</span>
          <br>
          <span>honour and joyaunce, till life end in Death.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>One, chiefest She, whose mandate proudly led<span class="linenum">85</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Nymphs, obedient vassals of her throne,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Cœlus and Vesta’s progeny ’twas said,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as by her queenly bearing might be known;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who over Earth and Ocean glamour shed,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the noble Captain, digne such boon to own,</span>
          <br>
          <span>with honest princely pomp comes forth to greet</span>
          <br>
          <span>as for such great egregious Ladye meet:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>And, told the station and the name of her,<span class="linenum">86</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in high exordium with high grace ornate,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">her cause of coming ’gan to him prefer,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by the high influ’ence of immobile Fate;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and ope before his eyne the gen’eral sphere</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of vasty regions, seas unnavigate,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the secret knowledge couched in prophecy,</span>
          <br>
          <span>which he and his alone deserved to see;</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_356">[Pg 356]</span> Taking his hand in hers she guides her guest<span class="linenum">87</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">straight to a tow’ering head of Hill divine,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whereof a splendid Pleasaunce is the crest,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">plated with purest gold and chrystal shine.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Therein the greater part of day they rest</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where loving play and lasting pleasures reign:</span>
          <br>
          <span>The Queen enjoys her loves in palace-bowers,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Nymphs in sylvan shades amid the flowers.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Thus Fair and Brave in fittest union meet,<span class="linenum">88</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">while minute by the merry hours of light;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and taste the genial gladness rare as sweet</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which their long labours and dark days turn bright:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Man’s high heroick deed, and daring feat</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of famous force, the World shall aye requite</span>
          <br>
          <span>with guerdon merited, and boon sublime,—</span>
          <br>
          <span>a Name and Fame that stand the test of Time.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>For, all our Ocean-maids so fair, so sprightful,<span class="linenum">89</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Tethys, and eke her Isle of angel-ground,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">None other thing be they, but the delightful</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Honours that make our human life renown’d:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">That high pre-em’inence and that glory rightful</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">are but the Triumphs, and the brows becrown’d</span>
          <br>
          <span>with Palms and Bay-wreaths, wond’ering gaze and praise:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Such the delights my fabled Isle displays;</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_357">[Pg 357]</span> These Immortalities,—in young world feignèd<span class="linenum">90</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by men who cherisht toils of noble aim,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">there on Olympus’ star-lit heights, attainèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on inclyt wings that soar to deathless Fame,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose Deeds of Derring-do the guerdon gainèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by dint of endless toil and moil we name</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Path of Virtue, stony, steep t’ ascend,</span>
          <br>
          <span>but joyous-glad, delicious-sweet at end:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Were nought but prizes brother-men impart<span class="linenum">91</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in change for Feats immortal, sovereign,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to that baronial Host, whose Arm and Art</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">made to be Gods that had been only men:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Jupiter, Phœbus, Mercury, and Mart,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Æneas, Rom’ulus, and the Theban twain,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Ceres, Diana, Juno, Pallas, were</span>
          <br>
          <span>but human flesh to human weakness heir.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Yet Fame, that trumpet of Man’s high emprize,<span class="linenum">92</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on Earth bestowed them names of strange estate,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Godheads, and deathless Semi-deities,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Indigetes and Heroes, “Grand” and “Great.”</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Wherefore, oh, ye! who Fame’s fair guerdon prize,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">if in the World with these ye lief would mate,</span>
          <br>
          <span>awake from Slumber, shake off Sloth ignave</span>
          <br>
          <span>that sinks Man’s freeborn soul to soul of slave.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_358">[Pg 358]</span> And bridle Av’arice-sin with iron bit,<span class="linenum">93</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">rein that Ambition which o’er-reigns your race</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in thousand fashions, and the base conceit</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of vicious Tyr’anny breeding vile disgrace:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Such tinkling honours, gold so counterfeit,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to true and honest worth ne’er raised the base:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Better to merit and the meed to miss,</span>
          <br>
          <span>than, lacking merit, every meed possess.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Or give us Peace, and Laws impartial deal,<span class="linenum">94</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that baulk the rich from plund’ering poorer men;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">or cloak your forms in coats of flashing steel,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and crush the law of hostile Saracen:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thus shall your valour raise the Commonweal</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all gaining ampler, none a smaller gain;</span>
          <br>
          <span>deservèd riches shall to you be rife</span>
          <br>
          <span>with Honours, alt-relief of human life.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Thus shall ye serve the King ye love so dear<span class="linenum">95</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">now with your proffer’d counsels sagely bold</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">then by the Sword, that shall your names uprear</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to dizzy heights where trod your sires of old:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">To ’tempt impossibilities forbear;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who wills aye finds a way; and thus enrol’d,</span>
          <br>
          <span>your names shall rival this heroick band,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and gain fair greeting in Dame Venus’ land.</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>
    </section>
    <section id="canto-ix-endnotes">
      <h3>Canto IX. Endnotes.</h3>
      <ol start="29">

        <li id="note-29">
          <p>The well Zemzem. <a href="#noteref-29" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-30">
          <p>Of Egypt. <a href="#noteref-30" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-31">
          <p><i>i.e.</i>, the capstan. <a href="#noteref-31" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-32">
          <p>Mace. <a href="#noteref-32" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-33">
          <p>The Moluccas. <a href="#noteref-33" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-34">
          <p>Asia. <a href="#noteref-34" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-35">
          <p>The Dove-nymph. <a href="#noteref-35" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-36">
          <p><span lang="el">Φιλαυτία</span>, egoism opposed to altruism. <a href="#noteref-36" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-37">
          <p>Myrrha. <a href="#noteref-37" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-38">
          <p>Ninus and Amnon. <a href="#noteref-38" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-39">
          <p>The peach (<i>Malus persica</i>). <a href="#noteref-39" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-40">
          <p>Persia, famed for tapestry. <a href="#noteref-40" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-41">
          <p>Narcissus. <a href="#noteref-41" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-42">
          <p>Anemone (Adonis’ blood). <a href="#noteref-42" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-43">
          <p>Marjoram. <a href="#noteref-43" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-44">

          <blockquote class="poetry"><div>
            <p>
              <span>And thou shalt notice at the end of all</span>
              <br>
              <span class="i1"><i>twixt ear and sickle how uprears the wall</i>.</span>
            </p>
            <cite>—<span class="smcap">Petrarch</span>. <a href="#noteref-44" class="pginternal">↩</a></cite>
          </div></blockquote>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </section>
  </section>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

  <section id="canto-x">
    <h2>Canto X.</h2>

    <section id="canto-x-argument">

      <p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_360"></a><a id="Page_361"></a>[Pg 361]</span></p>
      <h3>Argument<br>
        of the Tenth Canto.</h3>

      <p>Tethys inviteth the Navigators: The Siren’s prophetick Song,
        wherein she toucheth upon the principal achievements and conquests
        of the Portugueze Viceroys, the Governors, and the Captains
        in India until the days of D. Joam de Castro: Tethys with Da
        Gama ascendeth a Mount, whence she showeth him the Spheres,
        terrestrial and celestial: Description of the Globe, especially of
        Asia and Africa: The Navigators quit the Island; and, pursuing
        their Voyage, happily reach Lisbon.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="canto-x-another-argument">

      <h3>Another Argument.</h3>

      <blockquote class="poetry italics" lang="pt"><div>

        <p>
          <span>Ás mesas de vivificos manjares,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Com as Nymphas os Lusos valerosos,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Ouvem de seus vindouros singulares</span>
          <br>
          <span>Façanhas, em accentos numerosos:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Mostra-lhes Tethys tudo quanto os mares,</span>
          <br>
          <span>E quanto os ceos rodeam luminosos,</span>
          <br>
          <span>A pegueno volume reduzido,</span>
          <br>
          <span>E torna a frota ao Tejo tão querido.</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>

      <table class="table-poetry">
        <tbody>
          <tr>
            <td>At tables spread with life-restoring food,</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="4">(1–74)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>’Companied by their Nymphs, the Lusians bold</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Hear of their Future singular and good,</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>And daring deeds in number’d verses told:</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Tethys displays them all that Ocean-flood</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(75–143)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Girdeth, and circleth Heaven’s luminous fold,</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Dwarfed to a scanty volume; when the Fleet</td>
            <td class="border-left" rowspan="2">(144–end)</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Homewards her well-loved Tagus flies to greet.</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>
    </section>

    <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

    <section id="canto-x-body">
      <p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_362"></a><a id="Page_363"></a>[Pg 363]</span></p>
      <h3>Canto X.</h3>

      <blockquote class="poetry"><div>

        <p>
          <span>Now had the glowing Amourist, who won<span class="linenum">1</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">fair faithless Larissæa’s love, incline’d</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his steeds where lies, girt by the great Lagoon<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-45" id="noteref-45">[45]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Temistitam, the western world behind:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Favonius’ breath the brenning of the Sun</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">cooleth, and o’er the nat’ural tanks his wind</span>
          <br>
          <span>crisps the sea-mirror, and awakes the Lily</span>
          <br>
          <span>slumb’ering with Jasmin through the noontide stilly:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>When the fair Nymphs, who each her lover led,<span class="linenum">2</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">hand linkt in hand, conforming and content,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">trooped where the radiant Pleasaunce reared its head</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all gay with gold and metals lucident;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when bade the Queen that tables there be spread</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with varied viands chosen, excellent</span>
          <br>
          <span>for loved and loving vigour to restore,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the pow’ers which Love from weary nature bore.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_364">[Pg 364]</span> There on the radiant thrones, rich,
            chrystalline,<span class="linenum">3</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sit the blithe couples, cavalier and dame;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">while on the golden daïs in state recline</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the lovely Goddess, Gama loved by Fame:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Delicious dainties, delicate, divine,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that ántique Egypt’s lux’ury sink to shame,</span>
          <br>
          <span>heap the huge chargers of the tawny gold</span>
          <br>
          <span>from far Atlantis-treas’ury hither roll’d.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The wines of fragrant scent not sole excel<span class="linenum">4</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Falernus’ vintage, proud Italia’s boast,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but e’en th’ Ambrosia Jove esteems so well</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and eke esteems his sempiternal Host;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in cups where steely file may not prevail,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they spume crisp foam that glads man’s innermost</span>
          <br>
          <span>bosom, and warms his heart with sudden glow;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and with ice-water temper’d, leap and flow.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Told were a thousand tales of joy and mirth;<span class="linenum">5</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sweet smiles met subtle sayings warm with wit</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which to this course and that gave double worth,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and sharpened edge to blunted appetite:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Nor of the Harp harmonious was there dearth,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">(which in profoundest Pit the naked Sprite</span>
          <br>
          <span>awhile can respite from eternal pain),</span>
          <br>
          <span>sweeten’d by Siren-voice of Angel-strain.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_365">[Pg 365]</span> Thus sang that Nymph, the fairest of her kind,—<span class="linenum">6</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">her descant ech’oing down the halls sublime,—</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with consonance of instrument combine’d</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and all conforming to one tone and time:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">A sudden silence husheth every Wind,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and makes the Wavelet plash with softer chime,</span>
          <br>
          <span>while salvage animals in nat’ural lair</span>
          <br>
          <span>to slumber charmed, a dreamy musick hear.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Her voice of silver raiseth to the skies<span class="linenum">7</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the coming race of Barons high renown’d,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose prototypes were shown to Proteus’ eyes</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">within the hollow Sphere’s diaph’anous round;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-46" id="noteref-46">[46]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Jove’s goodly present and the choicest prize</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">giv’en him in vision. To the Realm profound</span>
          <br>
          <span>the tale prophetick told he, and the Maid</span>
          <br>
          <span>in Mem’ory’s depths the glorious hist’ory laid.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Subject of buskin ’tis, and not for sock,<span class="linenum">8</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">what in that vasty Lake the Nymph made known,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">things from Iópas hid and Demodoque;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Phœacian this, and that of Carthage-town.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thee, my Calliope! I now invoke</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in this mine éxtreme labour, thou alone</span>
          <br>
          <span>canst for my writing to my sprite restore</span>
          <br>
          <span>the gust of writing, which I ’joy no more.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_366">[Pg 366]</span> My years glide downwards, and my Summer’s pride<span class="linenum">9</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">mergeth in Autumn, passing, ah! how soon;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Fortune my Genius chills, and loves to chide</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">my Poet-soul no more my boast and boon:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Hopes long deferrèd bear me to the tide</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of black Oblivion, and eternal Swoon:</span>
          <br>
          <span>But deign to grant me thou, the Muses’ Queen,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to praise my People with my proper strain!</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Sang the fair Goddess how the wide Seas o’er<span class="linenum">10</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from Tagus bank, whence Gama cut his path,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall sail strong Navies, conq’uering ev’ry shore</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where Indic Ocean sucks his mighty breath:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">How all the Kings, who Géntoo gods adore,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and dare our yoke reject shall rue the wrath</span>
          <br>
          <span>of hard and hardy Arms, with steel and lowe,</span>
          <br>
          <span>till low to Gama or to Death they bow:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-47" id="noteref-47">[47]</a></span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Of one she chaunted that in Malabar<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-48" id="noteref-48">[48]</a><span class="linenum">11</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">held of the Priesthood highest dignity,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who, lest be loosen’d with the singular</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Barons the knot of love and amity,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall see his towns, his cities in the war</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with fire and sword, and wrath and cruelty</span>
          <br>
          <span>undone, which potent Samorim shall wage:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Against the stranger such shall be his rage.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_367">[Pg 367]</span> And eke she singeth how shall join the Fleet<span class="linenum">12</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in Belem moor’d, to ’bate this deadly bane,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when of his burthen nought could Ocean weet,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">our great Pacheco,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-49" id="noteref-49">[49]</a> ’Achilles
            Lusitan:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Lo! as he ent’ereth all his weight shall greet</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the curvèd timber and the fervid Main,</span>
          <br>
          <span>as in the waters every keel that groaneth</span>
          <br>
          <span>sits deeper swimming than its nature owneth.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But hardly landed on those Orient ends,<span class="linenum">13</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and, leaving with the royal Unbeliever</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Cochim-realm, some native troops where bends</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">its salty branches Cochim’s snakey river;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Nayrs’ infernal bands he breaks and rends,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in the Pass Cambalam,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-50" id="noteref-50">[50]</a> whereat
            shall shiver</span>
          <br>
          <span>with freezing fear the Orient’s fiery glow,</span>
          <br>
          <span>seeing so few so many men o’erthrow.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>The Samorim shall summon fresh allies;<span class="linenum">14</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Kings hurry’ing come from Bipur and Tanor,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-51" id="noteref-51">[51]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and where Narsinga’s serrièd crests arise</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">vowing high valour to their Grand Seignior:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Lo! at his bidding every Nayr-man hies,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that dwells ’twixt Calecut and Cananor,</span>
          <br>
          <span>two hostile peoples linkt at War’s demand,</span>
          <br>
          <span>by sea the Moormen come, Géntoos by land.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_368">[Pg 368]</span> Again shall scatter all their strong array<span class="linenum">15</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Pacheco grandly bold on shore and Main;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the mighty Meiny he shall crush and slay,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and be the Marvel of the Mal’abar plain:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Again shall dare the Pagan sans delay</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to offer battle for his bitter bane;</span>
          <br>
          <span>taunting his Host and off’ering vainest vows</span>
          <br>
          <span>his deaf, and dumb, and heedless Gods to ’rouse.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>No more the Passes only now defending,<span class="linenum">16</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he shall with fire consume thorpe, fane and town:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The Hound, waxt wood to see with toil unending</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his fencéd Cities on the plain bestrown,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall drive his soldiers, life so freely spending,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">against Pacheco, who with wings hath flown</span>
          <br>
          <span>for double movement: But at single bout</span>
          <br>
          <span>hither and thither all he puts to rout.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Shall come in person Sam’orim fight to dare,<span class="linenum">17</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to cheer his forces and fresh force enjoin;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but soon a bullet singing through the air</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall stain him red in lofty palanquin.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Naught now availeth him, ne wile ne snare</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ne force Pacheco deemeth like to win;</span>
          <br>
          <span>he shall vain venoms deal, deal treasons base</span>
          <br>
          <span>which aye gain less of gain by God’s good grace.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_369">[Pg 369]</span> “He<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-52" id="noteref-52">[52]</a> shall a seventh time,” she sang,
            “aspire<span class="linenum">18</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the brave beleaguer’d Lusian to assail,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whom toil and travail lack the strength to tire;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but save confusion nothing shall avail:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Then shall he bring to battle dread and dire</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">machines of timber, unknown, terrible,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to sink the Carvels by the board assailèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span>when force and fraud both tried alike have failèd.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“On water-plain upheaping fiery hill<span class="linenum">19</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he now shall ’tempt the Lusian Fleet to ’flame:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But soldier-science and the war-man’s will</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the strength shall weaken wherewithal he came.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Ne’er hath a Baron famed for martial skill,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that starward soarèd on the wings of Fame,</span>
          <br>
          <span>rivallèd this, who Palms from all hath won:—</span>
          <br>
          <span>Illustrious Greece, or Rome, my words condone!</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“For, such fierce battles in such manner gainèd<span class="linenum">20</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by a poor hundred or few more, such fight,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">such feints, such strength, such stratagems sustainèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">so many hounds not heartless hurled to flight;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">such feats, I say, must seem as Fables feignèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">or that the Hosts of Heav’en invoked, alight</span>
          <br>
          <span>earthward to aid him, shall to him impart</span>
          <br>
          <span>daring and doing, heart and warrior art.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_370">[Pg 370]</span> “Nor he who in the chámpaign Marathonian,<span class="linenum">21</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Darius’ mighty powers piecemeal rendeth;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">nor with four thousand men Lacedæmonian</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he who the Pass Thermopylæ defendeth;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">nor youthful Cocles of the strain Ausonian,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who with the whole Etrurian host contendeth</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Bridge to hold, nor Quintus Fabius e’er</span>
          <br>
          <span>like this in war showed strength and savoir-faire.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But here the Nymph’s triumphant measure dies,<span class="linenum">22</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shifting to sadden’d murmur low and slow,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">she sings ’mid tears and ill-suppressèd sighs</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the mighty Gestes that did no grat’itude know.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“Oh, Belisarius! thou who aye shalt rise</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in ninefold Choir, and ever nobler grow,</span>
          <br>
          <span>if Mars dishonour’d didst behold in thee</span>
          <br>
          <span>one to console thee here thy Shade shall see!</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Thou hast a Rival, not alone in deed<span class="linenum">23</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but in his dolence and his guerdon dour:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">In thee and him two breasts of noblest breed</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">we see degraded to low state obscure:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">To die in ’spital, on the bed of need,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who King and Law like wall of i’ron secure!</span>
          <br>
          <span>Thus do capricious Kings, whose will demandeth</span>
          <br>
          <span>more than what Justice or what Truth commandeth:</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_371">[Pg 371]</span> “Thus do the Kings who, drunk with flatt’ery,
            feel<span class="linenum">24</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the charm of show that gains their hearts’ content;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the doles of Ajax’ arm the due they deal</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to tongue of vain Ulysses fraudulent:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But,—oh Revenge!—these goods of little weal,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wasted on those who ghosts of Good present,</span>
          <br>
          <span>if brave and gentle Knights miss all their grants,</span>
          <br>
          <span>such grants but glut their greedy sycophants.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Yet thou! who paidest in such sorry ways,<span class="linenum">25</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">such liege, oh King! unjust in this alone,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">if ne’er ’twas thine to give him grade and praise,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’twas his to give his King a golden throne.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Long as Apollo bathes with blessèd rays</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">this ball of Earth, I swear, shall aye be known</span>
          <br>
          <span>amid the Great and Good his name and fame,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and thine for Av’arice aye shall bear the blame!</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“See now!” she sang, “another<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-53" id="noteref-53">[53]</a> comes in
            pride<span class="linenum">26</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of the Blood Royal, and he brings from home</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Son, whose name shall sound o’er Ocean-tide,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">high as the Roman’s in best days of Rome.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The two with warrior arms to hearts affied,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall deal to fertile Quiloa dreadful doom,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and crown a gentler King of loyal strain,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who ends the Tyrant’s fell perfidious reign.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_372">[Pg 372]</span> “Mombasah-city, with her brave array<span class="linenum">27</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of sumptuous palace, proudest edifice,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">defaced, deformed by fire and steel shall pay</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in kind the tale of byegone malefice.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thence on those Indian shores which proud display</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">their hostile fleets, and warlike artifice</span>
          <br>
          <span>’gainst the Lusians, with his sail and oar</span>
          <br>
          <span>shall young Lourenço work th’ extremes of war.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“What mighty vessels Sam’orim’s orders own<span class="linenum">28</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">covering Ocean, with his iron hail</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">poured from hot copper-tube in thunder-tone</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all shall he shatter, rudder, mast and sail;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">then with his grapples boldly, deftly thrown,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the hostile Ammiral he shall assail,</span>
          <br>
          <span>board her, and only with the lance and sword</span>
          <br>
          <span>shall slay four hecatombs of Moors abhor’d.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“But God’s prevision ’scaping human sight,<span class="linenum">29</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">alone who knows what good best serves His end,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall place the Hero where ne toil ne might</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his lost young life availeth to forfend.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">In Cháúl-bay, where fierce and furious fight</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with fire and steel shall fervid seas offend,</span>
          <br>
          <span>th’ Infidel so shall deal that end his days</span>
          <br>
          <span>where Egypt’s navy doth conjoin Cambay’s.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_373">[Pg 373]</span> “There shall the pow’er of man’ifold enemies,—<span class="linenum">30</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for only stronger force strong force can tire,—</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and Winds defaulting and fierce injuries</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Ocean, ’gainst a single life conspire:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here let all olden men from death arise</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to see his Valour, catch his noble fire:</span>
          <br>
          <span>A second Scæva<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-54" id="noteref-54">[54]</a> see who, hackt and
            torn,</span>
          <br>
          <span>laughs at surrender, quarter holds in scorn.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“With the fierce torture of a mangled thigh,<span class="linenum">31</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">torn off by bullet which at random past,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his stalwart arms he ceaseth not to ply,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that fiery Spirit flaming to the last:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Until another ball clean cuts the tie</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">so frail that linkèd Soul and Body fast;—</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Soul which loosèd from her prison fleets</span>
          <br>
          <span>whither the prize eterne such Conq’ueror greets.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Go, Soul! to Peace from Warfare turbulent<span class="linenum">32</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wherein thou meritedst sweet Peace serene!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for those torn tortured limbs, that life so rent</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who gave thee life prepareth vengeance keen:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">I hear e’en now the furious storm ferment,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">threating the terrible eternal teen,</span>
          <br>
          <span>of Chamber, Basilisco, Saker-fire,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to Mameluke cruel and Cambayan dire.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_374">[Pg 374]</span> “See with stupendous heart the war to wage,<span class="linenum">33</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">driven by rage and grief the Father flies,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">paternal fondness urging battle-gage,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">fire in his heart and water in his eyes:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Promise the sire’s distress, the soldier’s rage,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a bloody deluge o’er the knees shall rise</span>
          <br>
          <span>on ev’ry hostile deck: This Nyle shall fear,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Indus shall sight it, and the Gange shall hear.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“As when some lusty Bull would train and teach<span class="linenum">34</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his limbs for cruel fight, with horns he playeth</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on trunk of builder-oak, or mast-like beech,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and wounding empty air his might essayeth:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thus ere his keels Cambaya’s Gulf can reach</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Francisco, fierce with vengeful ardour preyeth</span>
          <br>
          <span>on Dabul,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-55" id="noteref-55">[55]</a> op’ulent harbour, whets his
            brand</span>
          <br>
          <span>and ’bates the tumid bragging of the land:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And soon shall scatter, sailing up the Bight,<span class="linenum">35</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Diu<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-56" id="noteref-56">[56]</a> enfamed for siege and
            battle dread,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Calecut’s strong Armada weak of fight,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that trusts to paddles steely mail instead:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">She of Melique Yáz, who boasts her might</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of balls by thee, O Vulcan! scatterèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span>shall see her Carvels to the frore deep sent</span>
          <br>
          <span>where hidden sleeps the humid element.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_375">[Pg 375]</span> “While she of Mir Hosem<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-57" id="noteref-57">[57]</a> which, linkèd fast<span class="linenum">36</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with grapples waits th’ Avenger side by side,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall sight the lopt-off arms and legs float past,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sans owner-bodies, o’er the shifting tide:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Like flamey bolt on Earth by thunder cast</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in blinding mist of blood the Braves shall ride:</span>
          <br>
          <span>There naught shall strike the shrinking ear and eye</span>
          <br>
          <span>save fire and steel-flash, shout and slogan-cry.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“But, ah! that homeward from such wars victorious,<span class="linenum">37</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">bound for the Tagus of his Fatherland,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he nigh should forfeit meeds so great and glorious,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by sad black chance I see in Fortune’s hand!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The Cape of Storms that guards his name memorious</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall guard his bones, nor blush shall stain its strand,</span>
          <br>
          <span>that noble spirit from the world to tear,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Egyptian strength ne’er tore nor Indian snare.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“There salvage Caffres shall have pow’er to do<span class="linenum">38</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">what ne’er could do the pow’er of dext’erous foe;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and the rude fire-charred club and staff subdue</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whom ne’er subduèd ball nor artful bow.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Forsooth His judgments hide from human view!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Vain fools who vainly judge what none may know,</span>
          <br>
          <span>call a misfortune, term a fate malign,</span>
          <br>
          <span>what is but Providence pure, all-wise, divine.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_376">[Pg 376]</span> “But, oh! what lustrous Light illumes mine
            eyes,”<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-58" id="noteref-58">[58]</a><span class="linenum">39</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">resumed the Nymph, as rose again her tone,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“there where Melinde’s blood-dyed Ocean lies</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from Lamo, Oja, Brava-town, o’erthrown</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by hand of Cunha, such a deed ne’er dies,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">o’er farthest seas his name shall aye be known</span>
          <br>
          <span>that lave those Austral Islands, and the shore</span>
          <br>
          <span>Saint Lawrence<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-59" id="noteref-59">[59]</a> hight and ring the wide
            world o’er.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“This Light is glance and glare of lucent arm<span class="linenum">40</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wherewith your Albuquerque’s hand shall tame</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Hormuz Parsi’s heart which be his harm,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">refusing gentle rule as yoke of shame.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">There shall he see of shafts the strident swarm,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in air revolving with recurvèd aim</span>
          <br>
          <span>upon his archer, for our God shall aid,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who holy faith of Mother Church would spread.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Then waxt the woeful wail a sorer strain,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“Oh, God, what vision in the further days!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">That fair young Prince of Gaul’s imperial vein,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">so knightly valiant, fain of fame and praise:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">I see him fighting, stricken, fallen, slain,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">piercèd in front by Caffre assegais:—</span>
          <br>
          <span>Blush, Albion! blush, when Britons dare to flee</span>
          <br>
          <span>and leave such Prince such óbscure doom to dree!”</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_377">[Pg 377]</span> “There the Salt Mountains<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-60" id="noteref-60">[60]</a> never shall
            defend<span class="linenum">41</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">corruption from remains of men that met</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">War’s doom, and o’er the seas and shores extend</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Gerum Isle,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-61" id="noteref-61">[61]</a> Maskat and
            Calayat:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Till by pure force of arms they learn to bend</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the subject neck, and pay the scot of Fate:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Compulsion sore this wicked Reign shall vex</span>
          <br>
          <span>and tithe of pearl that Barem’s oyster decks.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“What wreaths of glorious Palms I see them weave<span class="linenum">42</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wherewith by Victory’s hand his head is crown’d;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when he sans shade of fear or shame shall reave</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">illustrious Goa’s Island world-renown’d.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See, forced by Need’s hard law his prize to leave,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he seeks new favouring chance; and, soon as found,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the taken he retakes; such Arm and Art</span>
          <br>
          <span>shall conquer Fortune and the self of Mart.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Lo! he returns and bursts what dares oppose,<span class="linenum">43</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thro’ bullet, lance-plump, steel, fire, strongest hold;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">breaks with his brand the squadded host of foes,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the serried Moor, the Géntoo manifold.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">His inclyt sold’iery more of fury shows</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">than rampant Bulls, or Lyons hunger-bold,</span>
          <br>
          <span>that Day<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-62" id="noteref-62">[62]</a> for ever celebrate and
            digne</span>
          <br>
          <span>of Egypt’s Martyr-maid, Saint Catherine.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_378">[Pg 378]</span> “Nor shalt thou ’scape the fate to fall his
            prize,<span class="linenum">44</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">albeit so wealthy, and so strong thy site</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">there on Aurora’s bosom, whence thy rise,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thou Home of Opulence, Malacca hight!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The poysoned arrows which thine art supplies</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Kríses<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-63" id="noteref-63">[63]</a> thirsting, as I see,
            for fight,</span>
          <br>
          <span>th’ enamoured Malay-men, the Javan braves,</span>
          <br>
          <span>all of the Lusian shall become the slaves.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>She had more stanzas sung in Siren-strain,<span class="linenum">45</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">lauding her Albuquerque’s high renown,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when she recalled the pass’ionate deed, the stain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on his white fame that o’er the world hath shone.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The mighty Captain whom the Fates ordain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to view his toils win Glory’s lasting Crown,</span>
          <br>
          <span>should ever ’prove him kind and loved compeer</span>
          <br>
          <span>of his own men, not cruel judge severe.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>In days of hunger and of dire distress,<span class="linenum">46</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sickness, bolts, arrows, thunder, lightning-glint,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when the sore seasons and sad sites oppress</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his soldiers, rendering services sans stint;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">it seemeth salvage act of wild excess,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of heart inhuman, bosom insolent,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to make last penalty of Laws atone</span>
          <br>
          <span>for sins our frailty and our love condone.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_379">[Pg 379]</span> Abominable incest shall not be<span class="linenum">47</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his sin, nor ruffian rape of virgin pure,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-64" id="noteref-64">[64]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">not e’en dishonour of adultery,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but lapse with wanton slave-girl, vile, obscure:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">If urged by jealous sting, or modesty,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">or used to cruelty and harshness dour,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Man from his men mad anger curbeth not,</span>
          <br>
          <span>his Fame’s white shield shall bear black ugly blot.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Learnt Alexander that Apelles lovèd<span class="linenum">48</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and his Campaspe gave with glad consent,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">though was the Painter not his Soldier provèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">nor in hard urgent siege his force was pent.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Felt Cyrus, eke, Panthéa deeply movèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Araspas, by the fire of Passion brent,</span>
          <br>
          <span>though he had tane her charge, and pledged his oath</span>
          <br>
          <span>dishonest love should never break his troth:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>But see’ing the noble Persian ’slaved and sway’d<span class="linenum">49</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by pow’er of Passion, sans in fine defence,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he gives light pardon, and thus gained his aid</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in gravest case, the fittest recompense.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Himself perforce the mate of Judith made</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Baldwin hight “Bras-de-fer,” but his offence</span>
          <br>
          <span>her father, Charles, for troublous times condone’d,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and gave him life the Flanders’ reign to found.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_380">[Pg 380]</span> Again the Lyre its soul of musick sheds,<span class="linenum">50</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and sings the Nymph how shall Soáres fly</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">air-winn’owing flags whose terror far o’erspreads</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the ruddy coasted lands of Araby:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Th’ abominable town, Medina, dreads</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as Meca dreads and Gidá, and where lie</span>
          <br>
          <span>Abassia’s ultime shores: while Barbora fears</span>
          <br>
          <span>the fate that floodeth Zeyla-mart with tears.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And, eke, the noble Island Taproban,<span class="linenum">51</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose ancient name ne’er fail’d to give her note,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as still she reigns superb and sovereign</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by boon of fragrant tree-bark, biting-hot:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Toll of her treasure to the Lusitan</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ensign shall pay, when proud and high shall float</span>
          <br>
          <span>your breezy banners from the lofty tower,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and all Columbo fear your castled power.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Sequeira,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-65" id="noteref-65">[65]</a> too, far sailing for the
            shore,<span class="linenum">52</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Erythras, new way shall open wide</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to thee, Great Empire! who canst vaunt of yore</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to be Candáce’s and the Sheban’s nide:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Masuá<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-66" id="noteref-66">[66]</a> that hoards in tanks her
            watery store,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he shall behold by Port Arquico’s side;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and send explorers to each distant isle,</span>
          <br>
          <span>till novel wonder all the world beguile.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_381">[Pg 381]</span> “Succeeds Menézes;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-67" id="noteref-67">[67]</a> less enfamed his sword<span class="linenum">53</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall be in Asia than in Africk-land:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he shall chastise high Hormuz’ erring horde</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and twofold tribute claim with conq’uering hand.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thou also, Gama! shalt have rich reward</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for ban of exile, when to high command</span>
          <br>
          <span>entitled, ‘County’ thou shalt be restorèd</span>
          <br>
          <span>to the fair region this thy Feat explorèd.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“But soon that fatal Debt all flesh must pay,<span class="linenum">54</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wherefrom our Nature no exception knows,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">while deckt with proudest Royalty’s array,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from Life shall reave thee and Life’s toils and woes</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Other Menézes<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-68" id="noteref-68">[68]</a> cometh sans
            delay,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who few of years but much of prudence shows</span>
          <br>
          <span>in rule; right happy this Henrique’s lot</span>
          <br>
          <span>by human story ne’er to be forgot.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Conquer he shall not only Malabar,<span class="linenum">55</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">destroy Panáné and Coulété waste,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">hurling the bombards, which through hurtled air</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">deal horrid havock on th’ opposing breast;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but, dower’d with virtues truly singular,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he deals to seven-fold Spirit-foes his hest:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Covetise with Incont’inence he shall spurn,—</span>
          <br>
          <span>the highest conquest in the years that burn.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_382">[Pg 382]</span> “Him, when his presence shall the stars invite<span class="linenum">56</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">O Mascarenhas brave!<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-69" id="noteref-69">[69]</a> thou shalt
            succeed;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and if injurious men shall rob thy right</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">eternal Fame I promise for thy meed!</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">That ev’ry hostile tongue confess thy might</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and lofty valour, Fate for thee decreed</span>
          <br>
          <span>far more of Palm-wreaths shall thy glory crown,</span>
          <br>
          <span>than the Good Fortune due to thy renown.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Where Bintam’s<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-70" id="noteref-70">[70]</a> reign her baleful head
            uprears,<span class="linenum">57</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Maláca humbling with her harmful hate,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in one short day the thousand tyrannous years</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with bravest bosoms shalt avenge and ’bate:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Inhuman travails, perils without peers,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a thousand iron reefs, and dangerous strait,</span>
          <br>
          <span>stockade and bulwark, lances, arr’owy sleet,</span>
          <br>
          <span>all shalt thou break, I swear, all shalt submit.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“But Inde’s Ambition, and her Lucre-lust,<span class="linenum">58</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for ever flaunting bold and brazen face</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in front of God and Justice, shall disgust</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thy heart, but do thine honour no disgrace.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Who works vile inj’ury with unreas’oning trust</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in force, and footing lent by rank and place,</span>
          <br>
          <span>conquereth nothing, the true Conq’ueror he</span>
          <br>
          <span>who dares do naked Justice fair and free.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_383">[Pg 383]</span> “Yet to Sampaio<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-71" id="noteref-71">[71]</a> will I not gainsay<span class="linenum">59</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a noble valour shown by shrewdest blows,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that shall o’er Ocean flash like thunder-ray,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">curded with thousand corpses of his foes.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">He shall in Bacanor make fierce assay</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on Malabar, till owns in terror-throes</span>
          <br>
          <span>Cutiále,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-72" id="noteref-72">[72]</a> beaten with his battered
            Fleet</span>
          <br>
          <span>the dreadful ruin of a rout complete.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Nor less of Diu the fierce and fere Armade,<span class="linenum">60</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the dread of Cháúl, daring, proudly man’d,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with single glance shall fall, till all have fled</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">our Hector da Sylveira’s heavy hand:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Our Hector Portingall, of whom ’tis said,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that o’er yon ever armed Cambayan strand,</span>
          <br>
          <span>such wrath on Guzerats ’tis his to wreak</span>
          <br>
          <span>as Trojan Hector wreakèd on the Greek.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Then shall succeed to fierce Sampaio’s powers<span class="linenum">61</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Cunha,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-73" id="noteref-73">[73]</a> and hold the helm for
            many a year;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">building of Chálé-town the lofty towers,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">while quakes illustrious Diu his name to hear:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Bassein to him her sturdy standard lowers,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">yet not sans bloodshed, for with groan and tear</span>
          <br>
          <span>Melíque<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-74" id="noteref-74">[74]</a> se’eth his proudest estocade</span>
          <br>
          <span>storm’d not by firebrand but by sway of blade.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_384">[Pg 384]</span> “Next comes Noronha,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-75" id="noteref-75">[75]</a> whose auspicious sway<span class="linenum">62</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Diu from the barbarous Rumé-warman rends;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Diu, which beleaguer’d in his warrior way</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Antonio da Sylveira well defends:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Soon must Noronha doom of death obey,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when branch of thine,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-76" id="noteref-76">[76]</a> O Gama!
            aidance lends</span>
          <br>
          <span>to govern empire, and his fiery zeal</span>
          <br>
          <span>Fear’s pallid hue to Red Sea waves shall deal.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“From thine Estevam’s hands shall take the rein,<span class="linenum">63</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">one raised already to a high degree</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by his Brazilian wars, and trophies tane</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from the French Pyrat<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-77" id="noteref-77">[77]</a> homed upon
            the sea:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Then dubbèd Amm’irall of our Indian Main,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Damán’s proud Valverte in her panoply</span>
          <br>
          <span>he scales, the first that open gate to thread</span>
          <br>
          <span>by flames and thousand fletchers coverèd.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“To him Cambaya’s King, that haughtest Moor,<span class="linenum">64</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall yield in wealthy Diu the famous fort,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that he may gain against the Grand Mógor</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’spite his stupendous pow’er, your firm support:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thence shall he wend, most valiant conqueror,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to hem the Géntoo King, in Cal’ecut port</span>
          <br>
          <span>so let and hinder’d, he and all who hied</span>
          <br>
          <span>with him, retirèd in their blood red dyed.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_385">[Pg 385]</span> “Low shall he lay the city Repelim<span class="linenum">65</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">her Monarch forcing with his men to run;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">then well-nigh reached the Cape ’clept Comorim,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">another wreath of Fame by him is won;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the strongest squadron of the Samorim</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who doubted not to see the world undone,</span>
          <br>
          <span>he shall destroy with rage of fire and steel:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Be’adálá’s self his martial yoke shall feel.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Then from all Indus-land thus swept the foes,<span class="linenum">66</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Conqu’eror, coming scepter’d state to claim,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">finds no resistance where none dare oppose,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for nations tremble at his terrible name.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Alone shall risk of War the scourging woes</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Baticalá<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-78" id="noteref-78">[78]</a> and dree Be’adálá’s
            shame:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Here blood and corpses shall defile the land</span>
          <br>
          <span>deformed by thund’erous gun and fiery brand.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“This shall be Martin, who the name of Mart<span class="linenum">67</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">beareth and eke the deeds the name that gave:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">As much esteemed for arms in every part,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as wise in stratagem, in counsel grave</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Castro<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-79" id="noteref-79">[79]</a> succeeds, who Lusia’s
            estandart</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall bear for ever in the front to wave;</span>
          <br>
          <span>Successor the Succeeded’s work who endeth;</span>
          <br>
          <span>that buildeth Diu, this buildèd Diu defendeth.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_386">[Pg 386]</span> “The fightful Perse, th’ Abassian, and the Rume<span class="linenum">68</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who hath revived the name of Rome, their liege,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of varied customs, various in costume,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">fell tribes a thousand flocking to the siege;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">on Earth against the Heav’ens shall vainly fume</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that gars such handful so their lands abridge:</span>
          <br>
          <span>In blood of Portingalls this Paynimry</span>
          <br>
          <span>voweth its crookt and curved moustache to dye.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Dread Basiliscos, Lyons’ fiery flare,<span class="linenum">69</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">fierce Catapults, and mines that hidden spring,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall Mascarenhas<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-80" id="noteref-80">[80]</a> and his Barons
            dare,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and to th’ assurèd Death glad mien shall bring:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Till, when all Hope is fled and reigns Despair,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Castro, the saviour, cometh offering</span>
          <br>
          <span>his sons’ young lives, and wills their names survive</span>
          <br>
          <span>God’s sacrifices aye in Death to live.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“One son, Fernando, sci’on of tree so high,<span class="linenum">70</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where violentest flames with loudest roar</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">blow shatter’d ramparts to the smoky sky,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">there, stricken down on Earth, shall Heav’enward soar:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Alvaro, when mankind dread Winter fly</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and shift from humid path for arid shore,</span>
          <br>
          <span>opens the waters ’spite what risks oppose,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and fighteth winds and waves to fight the foes.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_387">[Pg 387]</span> “When, see! the Father cuts the wavy waste,<span class="linenum">71</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">leading what resteth of the Lusitan;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with warman’s arm and arts which e’er be best</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he offers battle’s rem’edy sovereign:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">These scale the remparts and at gateways jest,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">those cut broad gates through squads with rage insane:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Deeds they shall do so digne memorious glory,</span>
          <br>
          <span>song shall not suit nor Hist’ory hold the story.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“He shall once more upon the field appear<span class="linenum">72</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a strong intrepid victor, where his sight</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Cambaya’s puissant King<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-81" id="noteref-81">[81]</a> shall
            strike with fear,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and hideous hosts of quadrupeds<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-82" id="noteref-82">[82]</a>
            affright:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Nor less shall fail his puissant reign t’ uprear</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Hydalcham,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-83" id="noteref-83">[83]</a> when mighty arms
            shall smite</span>
          <br>
          <span>chastisèd Dábul, mistress of the coast,</span>
          <br>
          <span>nor shall spare Pondà’s distant inland post.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Barons like these, with peers from various parts,<span class="linenum">73</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all worthy marvel and all mastering Fame,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">raisèd to rank of Mart by martial arts,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall come the pleasures of this Isle to claim:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Their hands shall wave triumphant estandarts</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wherever keel-edge cutteth Ocean-stream:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Such men these Nymphs these banquets aye shall find,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Honours and Glories to high Gestes assign’d.”</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_388">[Pg 388]</span> Thus sang the Siren, while her sister-choir<span class="linenum">74</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with their sonorous plaudits filled the hall;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wherewith to hail the hour of glad desire</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">crowning the happy marriage-festival.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">“However Fortune’s wheel shall turn its tire,”</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with one harmonious accent chaunted all,</span>
          <br>
          <span>“renownèd People! rest your souls secure</span>
          <br>
          <span>of Honour, Valour, Fame, while worlds endure!”</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>When man’s corporeal necessity<span class="linenum">75</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">was with the noble viands satisfied,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and when in sweet melodious suavity,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all had their lofty future feats descried;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Tethys, with grace adorned and gravity,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that with a higher pomp and double pride</span>
          <br>
          <span>be crowned the revels of this joyous day,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to glad and happy Gama thus ’gan say:—</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“To thee Supremest Wisdom guerdon gave,<span class="linenum">76</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Baron! who hast beheld with fleshly eyne</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">what things the Future hath the pow’er to save</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from Mortals’ petty pride and science vain.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Follow me firmly, prudent as thou’rt brave,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to yonder craggy brake with all thy train!”</span>
          <br>
          <span>Thus she, and straightway through a long wood led</span>
          <br>
          <span>arduous, gloomy, fere for foot to tread.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_389">[Pg 389]</span> Nor far they steppèd when on culm’inant height<span class="linenum">77</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where stretcht a gem-enamel’d mead they stood;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Smaragd and Ruby-strewn, so rich the sight</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">presumed ’twas Paradisial floor they trod:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here swimmeth air a Globe,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-84" id="noteref-84">[84]</a>
            through which the light</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of purest radiance piercèd in such mode</span>
          <br>
          <span>that as its polisht surface clearest clear,</span>
          <br>
          <span>so doth its centre and its core appear.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>What mote its matter be escapes their eyes,<span class="linenum">78</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">yet ’scapes them not it holdeth in embrace</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">var’ious Orbs, by wand of Him All-wise</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">disposed to circle round one central place:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Rolling it sinks and then returns to rise,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and yet ne sinks ne rises; while one face</span>
          <br>
          <span>is shown to all and every part, each part</span>
          <br>
          <span>begins in fine and ends with heav’enly art:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Uniform, perfect, and self-poised it be,<span class="linenum">79</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">like th’ Archetype who drew the grand design.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Stood Gama overwhelmed this globe to see</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with joy, and hope its nature to divine:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">When thus the Goddess:—“Here th’ Epitome,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in little volume, to those eyes of thine</span>
          <br>
          <span>I give the gen’eral World, so shalt thou view</span>
          <br>
          <span>where goest thou, shalt go, and what shalt do.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_390">[Pg 390]</span> “Here see the mighty World-machine appear,<span class="linenum">80</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ethereal where the fourfold el’ements blend,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">made by His deep design, His lofty lere,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who lacks beginning and who has no end.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">He who surrounding holds this shapely sphere,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">this globe in filèd surface packt and pen’d,</span>
          <br>
          <span>is God: But what God is th’ intelligence</span>
          <br>
          <span>of mortal genius ne’er shall dare pretence.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“This primal Orb, that rolling doth enclose<span class="linenum">81</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the lesser circles in its lines confin’d;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">this Sphere, whose flood of clearest radiance flows</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">blinding man’s vision and his vulgar mind</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">is hight th’ Empyrean:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-85" id="noteref-85">[85]</a> Here the
            Blest repose,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">here perfect Spirits bliss eternal find,</span>
          <br>
          <span>inéffable joys which He alone may ken</span>
          <br>
          <span>Who hath no likeness in the World of Men.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Only to this Imperial Sphere belong<span class="linenum">82</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Gods of Truth; for Saturn, Janus, I,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Jove and his Juno are a fabled throng,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a mortal figment, a blind phantasy:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Only to deck the Poet’s sprightly song</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">we servèd; and, if more humanity</span>
          <br>
          <span>we gained of man, ’twas that his wit hath given</span>
          <br>
          <span>our names and natures to the stars of Heaven:</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_391">[Pg 391]</span> “And, eke, because that Holy Providence,—<span class="linenum">83</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Jupiter of mythologick strain,—</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by thousand Spirits wise in perfect sense,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ruleth all mundane things it doth sustain.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Prophetick Science doth this Truth dispense,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a Truth so many instances maintain:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Sprites that be good aye guide and favour man,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the bad his course impede whene’er they can.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-86" id="noteref-86">[86]</a></span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span>“Here willèd Picture, lief with change to play<span class="linenum">84</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">pleasing and teaching, mixing gay and grave,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to give them titles which your olden lay</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to fabled Gods in poet-fables gave:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">For even th’ Angels of th’ eternal day</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as Gods enrollèd were in sacred stave;</span>
          <br>
          <span>which e’en denies not such exalted name</span>
          <br>
          <span>sometimes to sinner though with falsest claim.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“In fine the God Supreme who works His will<span class="linenum">85</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by second worldly causes, all commands:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Return we now the works profound to tell</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of His divine and venerated Hands.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Beneath this circle, where all blissful dwell</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">pure godly Sprites, which fixt for ever stands,</span>
          <br>
          <span>another rolleth, and so swift none see</span>
          <br>
          <span>its course: This is the Primum Mobilé:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-87" id="noteref-87">[87]</a></span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span><span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_392">[Pg 392]</span> “And with its rapt<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-88" id="noteref-88">[88]</a> and rapid whirl it drags<span class="linenum">86</span></span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">all lesser spherelets which its womb containeth:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">By work of this the Sun who never flags</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with alien courses Day and Night sustaineth:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’Neath this swift orb another orb slow lags,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-89" id="noteref-89">[89]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">so slow, so hard a curb its ardour reineth,</span>
          <br>
          <span>while Phœbus makes, with ever splendid face,</span>
          <br>
          <span>two hundred rounds, this moves a single pace.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span>“Lower this other view,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-90" id="noteref-90">[90]</a> enamel’d
              gay<span class="linenum">87</span></span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with burnisht figures gleaming radiant bright;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which in it too hold constant ordered way,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">orbs on their axes scintillant empight:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thou seest well ’tis dight with brave array</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of broad and golden Zone, the Zodiac hight,</span>
          <br>
          <span>wherein twelve starry forms of an’imals shine,</span>
          <br>
          <span>that Phœbus’ mansions limit and define.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Behold in other parts the portraiture,<span class="linenum">88</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">limned by the Stars that sparkling glances shed:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Behold the Wain, attend the Cynosure,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and, with her fierce Worm-father, Andromed:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See Cassiopeia’s beauty lovely pure,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with turbulent Orion’s gesture dread:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Behold the Swan that doth in song expire,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Hare and Hounds, the Ship and dulcet Lyre.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_393">[Pg 393]</span> “Beneath this firmamental canopy<span class="linenum">89</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thou seest Saturn’s sky, that Godhead old:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">With faster flight doth Jove below him fly,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and Mars yet lower, bellick planet bold:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">In the fourth seat shines Heaven’s radiant eye;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">then Venus leadeth all her Loves enrol’d;</span>
          <br>
          <span>Mercury wends with eloquence divine;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and ’neath him Dian showeth faces trine.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“In all these orbits motion different<span class="linenum">90</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shalt see; in these ’tis swift, in those ’tis slow;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">now fly they farthest from the firmament,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">then sweep they nearest earth that lurks below;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">even so willed the Sire Omnipotent,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who made the Fire and Air, the Wind and Snow:</span>
          <br>
          <span>These lie more inward, as thou shalt be shown,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and Earth with Ocean for their centre own.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Within this centre, Inn<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-91" id="noteref-91">[91]</a>
            of humankind,<span class="linenum">91</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose reckless spirits not alone defy</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">suff’erings and ills to stable Earth confine’d,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but e’en the Sea’s fierce instability;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thou shalt see various Continents define’d</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by blindly raging tides, where parted lie</span>
          <br>
          <span>the various Realms which various monarchs sway,</span>
          <br>
          <span>whose varied Customs varied laws obey.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_394">[Pg 394]</span> “See high, haught Europe that adores the Rood,<span class="linenum">92</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for pow’er and polity o’er all renown’d:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See Africk grudging ev’ery worldly good,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">yon rough, incult and monster-haunted ground;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose Stormy Cape till now your search withstood,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by Nature ’stablished as her Austral bound:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Behold this quarter where the Blackmoors dwell</span>
          <br>
          <span>sans-loys, sans-foys, whose numbers none can tell.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Behold the Ben’omotápa’s puissant reign<span class="linenum">93</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of salvage Negros, nude and noisome race,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where shall for Holy Faith be foully slain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">martyr’d Gonçalo,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-92" id="noteref-92">[92]</a> suffering sore
            disgrace:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">This hidden Hemisphere to golden vein</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">gives birth, which man must win by sweat of face</span>
          <br>
          <span>See from yon Lake, whence Nilus rolls his tide,</span>
          <br>
          <span>how springs Cuáma<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-93" id="noteref-93">[93]</a> from
            the farther side.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Behold those Blackmoors and their huts that stand<span class="linenum">94</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sans doors, each castled in his natal nest,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they trust of Royal Justice the command,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and in the candour of the neighbour’s breast:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Behold how furious flies the bestial band</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">like flock of dingy stares thick packt and prest;</span>
          <br>
          <span>to fight Sofala’s fortress they pretend</span>
          <br>
          <span>which dext’erous Nhaia’s arm and wits defend:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_395">[Pg 395]</span> “See there the Lakes that cradle Father
            Nyle<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-94" id="noteref-94">[94]</a><span class="linenum">95</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose ultime sources men of old ne’er knew:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See how he waters, ’gend’ering cockadrille,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Abassia-lond whose sons to <span class="smcap">Christ</span> be
            true:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Behold how bare of bulwarks (novel style)</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they show a better front against the foe:</span>
          <br>
          <span>See Meroe-island whilom known to fame,</span>
          <br>
          <span>which now the wild inhabitants Nobá name.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“On distant Africk hills a son of thee<span class="linenum">96</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in Turkish wars shall win the fame of Brave;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">hight Dom Christóvam shall the hero be,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but flesh from destined Death no skill shall save.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here view the Coast where shelter from the sea</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and glad relief to thee Melinde gave:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Note how yon Rhaptus<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-95" id="noteref-95">[95]</a>-stream, whose wide
            expanse</span>
          <br>
          <span>natives call Obi, ent’ereth in Quilmance.</span>
</p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_396">[Pg 396]</span> “The Cape which Antients ‘Aromatic’ clepe<span class="linenum">97</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">behold, yclept by Moderns Guardafú;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where opes the Red Sea mouth, so wide and deep,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Sea whose ruddy bed lends blushing hue:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">This as a bourne was far thrust out to keep</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Asia distinct from Africk, and a few</span>
          <br>
          <span>of the best markets Negro seaboards claim</span>
          <br>
          <span>Arquico are, Masuá and Súanquem.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“View éxtreme Suez where, old Annals say,<span class="linenum">98</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">once stood the city hight Hero’opolis;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by some Arsin’oe called, and in our day</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">she holdeth Egypt’s fleets and argosies:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Behold the watery depths, where clove his way</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Moses the mighty in past centuries:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Asia beginneth here her huge extent</span>
          <br>
          <span>in regions, kingdoms, empires opulent.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“See Sinai mountain,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-96" id="noteref-96">[96]</a> with
            her boast and pride<span class="linenum">99</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the silver bier of saintly Catherine:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See Toro-port and Gidá, scant supplied</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with fountain-water soft and crystalline:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Behold the Straits which end the southern side</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of arid Aden-realms, that here confine</span>
          <br>
          <span>with tall Arzíran range, nude stone and live,</span>
          <br>
          <span>whence soft sweet rains of Heaven ne’er derive.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_397">[Pg 397]</span> “See threefold Ar’aby, cov’ering so much
            ground,<span class="linenum">100</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where tawny peoples vague o’er vasty space;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whence come the Rabytes,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-97" id="noteref-97">[97]</a> best
            for battle found,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">light-limbed, high-fettled, noble-blooded race.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Behold the coast that trends to bind and bound</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">yon other Persian Strait, where sight can trace</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Headland proud the potent name to own</span>
          <br>
          <span>of Fartak-city, erst to Fame well-known.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Behold insign Dofar that doth command<span class="linenum">101</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for Christian altars sweetest incense-store:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But note, beginning now on further band</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Rosalgáté’s<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-98" id="noteref-98">[98]</a>
            ever greedy shore,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">yon Hormuz Kingdom strown along the strand,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose fame for riches still shall higher soar</span>
          <br>
          <span>when the Turk’s galleys, and his fierce Armade</span>
          <br>
          <span>see Castel-Branco<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-99" id="noteref-99">[99]</a> bare
            his deadly blade.</span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span>“Behold of Asabón the Head, now hight<span class="linenum">102</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Mosandam, by the men who plough the Main:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here lies the Gulf whose long and lake-like Bight</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">parts Araby from fertile Persia’s plain.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Attend yon Barem Isle, with depths bedight</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by the rich pearly shell whose blushes feign</span>
          <br>
          <span>Auroran tints; and view in Ocean brine</span>
          <br>
          <span>Euphrate and Tygre in one bed conjoin.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_398">[Pg 398]</span> “Great Persia’s noble Empire here behold,<span class="linenum">103</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ever on Destr’ier or in Camp of War,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose sons disdain the copper-tube to mould,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and hands not horny with the Cymitar.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But see yon Gerum Isle the tale unfold</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of mighty things which Time can make or mar;</span>
          <br>
          <span>for of Armúza-town yon shore upon</span>
          <br>
          <span>the name and glory this her rival won.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Here Dom Philippe de Menézes view<span class="linenum">104</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">approved a doughty valiant man-at-arms,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who with his Portughueze exceeding few</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall quell the Lára<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-100" id="noteref-100">[100]</a> Parsi’s
            potent swarms:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Pedro de Sousa too shall make them rue</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">reversèd Fortunes, Warfare’s deadliest harms,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who had his prowess in Ampáza<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-101" id="noteref-101">[101]</a>
            shown,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and took the land by sweep of sword alone.</span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span>“But now the Narrows and their noted head<span class="linenum">105</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Cape Jask, Carpella called by those of yore,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">quit we, the dry terrene scant favourèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by Nature niggard of her normal store:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Whilere Carmánia ’twas intitulèd:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But view fair Indus-flood whose waters pour</span>
          <br>
          <span>adown his natal heights, and in the range</span>
          <br>
          <span>of neighbour-mountains see the source of Gange.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_399">[Pg 399]</span> “Behold Ulcindé’s most luxuriant land<span class="linenum">106</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and of Jaqueta-shore yon intime bay;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the monster Bore which roaring floods the strand,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and ebb which flieth with like force away.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See where Cambaya’s rich feracious band</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">boundeth re-entering seas, the Gulf Cambay;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and thousand Cities which I leave untold,</span>
          <br>
          <span>here hoard their wealth for you to have and hold.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-102" id="noteref-102">[102]</a></span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span>“See, runs the cel’ebrate seaboard Hindostánian<span class="linenum">107</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">southward till reached its point, Cape Comori,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">erst ‘Cori’ called, where th’ Island Taprobanian</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">(’tis now Ceylon) encrowns the fronting sea:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Besides these waves thy people Lusitanian,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">who with their doughty arms will follow thee,</span>
          <br>
          <span>by conq’uering wars shall lands and towns debel,</span>
          <br>
          <span>wherein your sons and sons of sons shall dwell.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“The regions lying ’twixt these Rivers twain,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-103" id="noteref-103">[103]</a><span class="linenum">108</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thou see’st, with various tribes are infinite:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here rule the Moslems; there the Géntoos reign</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose Holy Writ the Devil did indite:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See where Narsinga’s seigniories contain</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the saintly relicks blessing human sprite,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Thomé’s remains, the Miss’ioner sanctified</span>
          <br>
          <span>who thrust his finger in Lord Jesu’s side.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_400">[Pg 400]</span> “Here rose the potent City, Meliapor<span class="linenum">109</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">namèd, in olden time rich, vast and grand:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Her sons their olden idols did adore</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as still adoreth that iniquious band:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">In those past ages stood she far from shore,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when to declare glad tidings o’er the land</span>
          <br>
          <span>Thomé came preaching, after he had trod</span>
          <br>
          <span>a thousand regions taught to know his God.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Here came he preaching, and the while he gave<span class="linenum">110</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">health to the sick, revival to the dead;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when Chance one day brought floating o’er the wave</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a forest-tree of size unmeasurèd:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The King a Palace building lief would save</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the waif for timber, and determinèd</span>
          <br>
          <span>the mighty bulk of trunk ashore to train</span>
          <br>
          <span>by force of engines, elephants and men.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Now was that lumber of such vasty size,<span class="linenum">111</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">no jot it moves, however hard they bear;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when lo! th’ Apostle of <span class="smcap">Christ’s</span>
            verities</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wastes in the business less of toil and care:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">His trailing waist-cord to the tree he ties,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">raises and sans an effort hales it where</span>
          <br>
          <span>a sumptuous Temple he would rear sublime,</span>
          <br>
          <span>a fixt example for all future time.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_401">[Pg 401]</span> “Right well he knew how ’tis of Faith aver’d<span class="linenum">112</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">‘Faith moveth mountains’ will or nill they move,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">lending a listening ear to Holy Word:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">As <span class="smcap">Christ</span> had taught him, so ’twas his to
            prove:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">By such a mir’acle much the mob was stir’d;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Brahmins held it something from above;</span>
          <br>
          <span>for, seen his signs and seen his saintly life,</span>
          <br>
          <span>they fear the loss of old prerogative.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“These be the Sacerdotes of Géntoo-creed,<span class="linenum">113</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that of sore jealousy felt most the pain;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they seek ill-ways a thousand and take rede</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thomé to silence or to gar him slain:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The Principal who dons the three-twine thread,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-104" id="noteref-104">[104]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by a deed of horror makes the lesson plain,</span>
          <br>
          <span>there be no Hatred fell, and fere, and curst,</span>
          <br>
          <span>as by false Virtue for true Virtue nurst.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“One of his sons he slaughters, and accuses<span class="linenum">114</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thomé of murther, who was innocent:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Bringing false witnesses, as there the use is,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">him to the death they doom incontinent.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The Saint, assurèd that his best excuses</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">are his appeals to God Omnipotent,</span>
          <br>
          <span>prepares to work before the King and Court</span>
          <br>
          <span>a publick marvel of the major sort.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_402">[Pg 402]</span> “He bids be brought the body of the slain<span class="linenum">115</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that it may live again, and be affied</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to name its slayer, and its word be tane</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as proof of testimony certified.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">All saw the youth revive, arise again</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in name of Jesu <span class="smcap">Christ</span> the Crucified:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Thomé he thanks when raised to life anew</span>
          <br>
          <span>and names his father as the man who slew.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“So much of marvel did this Mir’acle claim,<span class="linenum">116</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">straightway in Holy Water bathes the King</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">followed by many: These kiss Thomé’s hem</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">while those the praises of his Godhead sing.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Such ire the Brahmans and such furies ’flame,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Envy so pricks them with her venom’d sting,</span>
          <br>
          <span>that rousing ruffian-rout to wrath condign</span>
          <br>
          <span>a second slaughter-plot the priests design.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“One day when preaching to the folk he stood<span class="linenum">117</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they feigned a quarrel ’mid the mob to ’rise:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Already <span class="smcap">Christ</span> his Holy man endow’d</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with saintly martyrdom that opes the skies.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Rainèd innumerable stones the crowd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">upon the victim, sacred sacrifice,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and last a villain, hast’ier than the rest,</span>
          <br>
          <span>pierced with a cruel spear his godly breast.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_403">[Pg 403]</span> “Wept Gange and Indus, true Thomé! thy fate,<span class="linenum">118</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">wept thee whatever lands thy foot had trod;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">yet weep thee more the souls in blissful state</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thou led’st to don the robes of Holy Rood.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But Angels waiting at the Par’adise-gate</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">meet thee with smiling faces, hymning God.</span>
          <br>
          <span>We pray thee, pray that still vouchsafe thy Lord</span>
          <br>
          <span>unto thy Lusians His good aid afford.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And you, ye others, who usurp the name<span class="linenum">119</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of God’s Apostles, miss’ioners like Thomé,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">say, an ye boast of apostolick claim</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">why fare not Holy Faith to preach and pray?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">If ye be salt see how yourselves ye shame,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">cleaving to home, where none the Prophet play;</span>
          <br>
          <span>how shall be salted in dark days as these</span>
          <br>
          <span>(Pagans I leave) such hosts of heresies?</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“But now this per’ilous theme I pass beyond;<span class="linenum">120</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">gain we again the limnèd shore and site.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here with the City whereof Fame is fond,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">bends the long bow-line of Gangetick Bight:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Runneth Narsinga rich and potent lond,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">runneth Orissa vaunting tissues bright,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and at the bottom of the Bay’s long line,</span>
          <br>
          <span>illustrious Ganges seeks his home, the brine:</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_404">[Pg 404]</span> “Ganges whose acc’olents bathe, and bathing
            die,<span class="linenum">121</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and die in lively faith withal secure</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whatever sins upon their spirits lie,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Holy Waters lave them sinless-pure.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See Cathigam,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-105" id="noteref-105">[105]</a> amid the
            highest high</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in Bengal-province, proud of varied store</span>
          <br>
          <span>abundant, but behold how placed the Post</span>
          <br>
          <span>where sweeps the shore-line t’wards the southing coast.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Arracan-realm behold, behold the seat<span class="linenum">122</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of Pegu peopled by a monster-brood;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">monsters that ’gendered meeting most unmeet</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of whelp and woman in the lonely wood.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here bells of sounding orichalc they fit</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">upon their bodies, by the craftihood</span>
          <br>
          <span>of subtle Queen, who such new custom plan’d</span>
          <br>
          <span>to ’bate th’ accursèd Sin and Crime nefand.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Behold Táváí City,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-106" id="noteref-106">[106]</a>
            whence begin<span class="linenum">123</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Siam’s dominions, Reign of vast extent;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Tenassarí, Quedá of towns the Queen</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that bear the burthen of the hot piment.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">There farther forwards shall ye make, I ween,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Maláca’s market grand and opulent,</span>
          <br>
          <span>whither each Province of the long seaboard</span>
          <br>
          <span>shall send of merchantry rich varied hoard.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_405">[Pg 405]</span> “From this Peninsula, they say, the sea<span class="linenum">124</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">parted with puissant waves, and ent’ering tore</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Samátra’s noble island, wont to be</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">joined to the Main as seen by men of yore.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’Twas callèd Chersonèse, and such degree</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">it gained by earth that yielded golden ore,</span>
          <br>
          <span>they gave a golden ep’ithet to the ground:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Some be who fancy Ophir here was found.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“But on her Lands-end throned see Cingapúr,<span class="linenum">125</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where the wide sea-road shrinks to narrow way:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thence curves the coast to face the Cynosure,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and lastly trends Auroraward its lay:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See Pam, Patáne,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-107" id="noteref-107">[107]</a> and in
            length obscure,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Siam, that ruleth all with royal sway;</span>
          <br>
          <span>behold Menam, who rolls his lordly tide</span>
          <br>
          <span>from Source Chiámái called, Lake long and wide.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Thou see’st in spaces of such vast extent<span class="linenum">126</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">nations of thousand names and yet unnamèd;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Láós in land and people prepotent,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Avás and Bramás<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-108" id="noteref-108">[108]</a> for vast
            ranges famèd.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See how in distant wilds and wolds lie pent</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the self-styled Gueons,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-109" id="noteref-109">[109]</a>
            salvage folk untamèd:</span><br>
          <span>Man’s flesh they eat: their own they paint and sear,</span>
          <br>
          <span>branding with burning iron,—usage fere!</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_406">[Pg 406]</span> “See Mecom river fret Cambodia’s coast,<span class="linenum">127</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his name by ‘Water-Captain’ men explain;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in summer only when he swelleth most,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he leaves his bed to flood and feed the Plain:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">As the frore Nyle he doth his freshets boast;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his peoples hold the fond belief and vain,</span>
          <br>
          <span>that pains and glories after death are ’signed</span>
          <br>
          <span>to brutes and soulless beasts of basest kind.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“This Stream with gentle, bland repose shall greet<span class="linenum">128</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in his embrace the Song,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-110" id="noteref-110">[110]</a> that
            swam to land</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from sad and piteous shipwreck dripping wet,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">’scaped from the reefs and rocks that fang the strand;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from hunger-tortures and the perilous strait,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">what time went forth the dour unjust command</span>
          <br>
          <span>on him, whose high sonorous lyre shall claim</span>
          <br>
          <span>such want of Fortune and such wealth of Fame.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Here courseth, see, the callèd Champa<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-111" id="noteref-111">[111]</a>
            shore,<span class="linenum">129</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with woods of od’orous wood ’tis deckt and dight:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See Cauchichina still of note obscure,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and of Ainam<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-112" id="noteref-112">[112]</a> yon undiscoverèd
            Bight:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Here the proud Empire famed evermore</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for wide-spread lands and wealth and matchless might,</span>
          <br>
          <span>of China runs, and boasts the whole her own</span>
          <br>
          <span>’twixt torrid Cancer and the frigid Zone.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_407">[Pg 407]</span> “Behold yon wondrous and incred’ible Wall,<span class="linenum">130</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">this and that other Region built to part;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">most certain symbol this which shows to all,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Imperial Puissance proud in arm and art:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">These their born Princes to the throne ne’er call,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Nor Son succeedeth Sire in subject heart;</span>
          <br>
          <span>the prop’erest man as Monarch they devise,</span>
          <br>
          <span>Some Knight for virtue famèd, brave and wise.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Parforce hide other vasty lands from thee<span class="linenum">131</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">until what time no land remain unfound:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But leave thou not those Islands of the Sea,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-113" id="noteref-113">[113]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">where Nature rises to Fame’s highest round:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">This Realm half-shadowed, China’s empery</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">afar reflecting, whither ships are bound,</span>
          <br>
          <span>is the Japan, whose virgin silver mine</span>
          <br>
          <span>shall shine still sheen’ier with the Law Divine.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-114" id="noteref-114">[114]</a></span>
</p>
        <p>
          <span>“Here see o’er Oriental seas bespread<span class="linenum">132</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">infinite island-groups and alwhere strewed:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Tidore, Ternáte view, whose burning head</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">lanceth the wavy flame and fiery flood:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">There see the groves the biting clove-bud shed,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">bought with the price of Portughueze’s blood;</span>
          <br>
          <span>here dwell the golden fowls, whose home is air</span>
          <br>
          <span>and never earthward save in death may fare.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_408">[Pg 408]</span> “See Banda’s Islets, which enamelled glow<span class="linenum">133</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">various painted by the rosy fruits;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">variegate birds, that flit from bough to bough,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">take tithe and tribute of the greeny nuts:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See Borneo’s sea-girt shore where ever flow</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the perfumed liquor’s thick and curded gouts,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the tears of forest-trees men ‘Camphor’ clepe,</span>
          <br>
          <span>wherefore that Island crop of Fame shall reap.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Timor thence further sendeth forth her store<span class="linenum">134</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of fragrant Saunders, wood medicinal:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">See Sunda’s Isle,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-115" id="noteref-115">[115]</a> so stretch
            her farther shore</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that hideth Auster’s regions of appall:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The wand’ering men who inner wilds explore,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">tell of a stream whose marvels never pall;</span>
          <br>
          <span>for, where its lone and single current floweth,</span>
          <br>
          <span>dead wood that in it falls a live stone groweth.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Behold yon land, made island of the sea<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-116" id="noteref-116">[116]</a><span class="linenum">135</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by Time, whose trembling flame in vapour swelleth,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">see Petroil-fountain, and the prodigy</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of od’orous juice the weeping tree distilleth;<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-117" id="noteref-117">[117]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sweeter than scent-tears shed in Araby</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">by Cin’yras’ daughter, where for aye she dwelleth;</span>
          <br>
          <span>and see, how holding all that others hold,</span>
          <br>
          <span>soft silk she hoardeth and the nugget-gold.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_409">[Pg 409]</span> “See in Ceylon that Peak<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-118" id="noteref-118">[118]</a> so stark, so gaunt,<span class="linenum">136</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shooting high o’er the clouds or mocking sight:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">The native peoples hold it sacrosanct</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for the famed Stone where print of foot is pight:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">O’er lone Maldivia’s islets grows the plant,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-119" id="noteref-119">[119]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">beneath profoundest seas, of sov’ereign might;</span>
          <br>
          <span>whose pome of ev’ry Theriack is confest</span>
          <br>
          <span>by cunning leech of antidotes the best.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Eke shalt thou see toforn the Red Sea strait<span class="linenum">137</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Socotra, famed for Aloë’s bitter growth:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">I subject other sea-girt Isles to ’wait</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">your steps where sandy Africk seaboard show’th;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and yieldeth floating mass<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-120" id="noteref-120">[120]</a>
            rare, odorate,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but whence it cometh none of mortals know’th:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Of Sam Lourenço see yon famous Isle,</span>
          <br>
          <span>which certain travellers Madagascar style.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Here distant Orient’s new-found climates see,<span class="linenum">138</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">climes on the world by this your Feat bestowèd</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that opened Ocean-portals patent-free,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose vasty plain with doughty hearts you plowèd.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">But in the Ponent als a reason be,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">a Lusian’s noble exploit be avowèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who being greatly by his King aggrieved,</span>
          <br>
          <span>shall force a passage Fancy ne’er conceived.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-121" id="noteref-121">[121]</a></span>
</p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_410">[Pg 410]</span> “See yon huge Region whose contin’uous lines<span class="linenum">139</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">course from Callisto to the contr’ary Pole;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">superb shall’t be by boast of lucent mines</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose veins Apollo’s golden tincture stole.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Castile, your ally, worthily designs</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to make its barb’arous neck her yoke to thole:</span>
          <br>
          <span>In varied regions bide its various tribes,</span>
          <br>
          <span>with different rites which different use prescribes.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“But here where Earth spreads wider, ye shall claim<span class="linenum">140</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">realms by the ruddy Dye-wood made renown’d:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">These of the ‘Sacred Cross’<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-122" id="noteref-122">[122]</a>
            shall win the name:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">By your first Navy shall that world be found.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Along this seaboard, which your arm shall tame,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall wend him seeking Earth’s extremest bound</span>
          <br>
          <span>Magellan who, good sooth, by birth shall be</span>
          <br>
          <span>a Portughueze in all save loyalty.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“And when his courses pass the midway place<span class="linenum">141</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which from the Pole Antarctick parts the Line,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">he shall behold an all but Giant race<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-123" id="noteref-123">[123]</a></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">holding the countries which therewith confine:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Still onwards lie the Straits that aye shall grace</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">his name, which sea with sea through land conjoin;</span>
          <br>
          <span>a sea and land where horrid Auster bideth,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and ’neath his frozen wings their measure hideth.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-124" id="noteref-124">[124]</a></span>
</p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_411">[Pg 411]</span> “Thus far, O Portingalls! to you was given<span class="linenum">142</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the feats of future ages now to know;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">how o’er those Oceans which your keels have riven</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">great-hearted Barons grandest deeds shall do:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">And hence, since all with mighty toils have striven,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">toils by whose Fame your favour aye shall grow</span>
          <br>
          <span>with your eternal Spouses debonnair,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who shall weave glorious crowns for you to wear:</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>“Ye can embark, for fav’ouring blows the Wind<span class="linenum">143</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and to your well-loved home the seas be clear.”</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Thus spake the Goddess, and the Braves incline’d</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">from the glad Island of sweet Love to steer.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">They bear refreshment of the noblest kind,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">they bear the longed-for Comp’any, each his Fere,</span>
          <br>
          <span>the Nymph that ever shall in heart abide,</span>
          <br>
          <span>long as the sunshine warmeth land and tide.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>So fared they, cutting through the Main serene<span class="linenum">144</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with favouring breezes that ne’er blew in ire,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">till they had sighted that familiar scene</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">their Fatherland, and ever fond desire.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">They past the Tagus-mouth, our stream amene,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and gave their Country and their dread loved Sire,</span>
          <br>
          <span>who willed their voyage, glory and renown</span>
          <br>
          <span>and added lustrous titles to his crown.</span>
        </p>


        <hr class="tb">
        <p>
          <span><span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_412">[Pg 412]</span> No more, my Muse!<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-125" id="noteref-125">[125]</a> no more, for now my Lyre<span class="linenum">145</span></span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">untunèd lies, and hoarse my voice of Song;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">not that of singing tire I, but I tire</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">singing for surd and horny-hearted throng.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Favours which Poet-fancy mostly fire</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">our Land gives not, ah, no! ’tis plunged too long</span>
          <br>
          <span>in lust of lucre, whelmed in rudest folly</span>
          <br>
          <span>of vile, austere and vulgar melancholy.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Nor ken I wherefore, by what Fate indign<span class="linenum">146</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">she ’joys ne genial pride, ne gen’eral taste,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">which strengthen mortal spirit and incline</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to face all travail with a happy haste.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Wherefore, O King! thou whom the Will Divine</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">hath on the kingly throne for purpose place’d</span>
          <br>
          <span>look that thou be (and see the realms of Earth)</span>
          <br>
          <span>sole Lord of vassals peerless in their worth!</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Look how they gladly wend by many a way,<span class="linenum">147</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with raging Bulls’ or rampant Lyons’ might,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">self-doomed to sleepless night and foodless day,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to fire and steel, shaft-show’er and bullet-flight:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">To torrid Tropicks, Arcticks frore and grey,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">the Pagan’s buffet and the Moor’s despight;</span>
          <br>
          <span>to risks invis’ible threating human life,</span>
          <br>
          <span>to wrack, sea-monsters and the waves’ wild strife.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_413">[Pg 413]</span> All risks to serve thy cause they dare affront,<span class="linenum">148</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to thee though distant yield they homage due,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of ev’ry hard command they bear the brunt</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">sans answer, ever prompt and ever true:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">On single look of favour could they count,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">infernal Demons, black with Hell’s own hue,</span>
          <br>
          <span>with thee they fain encounter, and they dare</span>
          <br>
          <span>unconquer’d Conqueror their King declare.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Favour them alway, gladden every face<span class="linenum">149</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with thy fair Presence, blithe Humanity;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of rig’orous rule relieve them, deal the grace</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of milder law that leads to sanctity:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">impart to long Experience rank and place,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">an with Experience ’habit Honesty</span>
          <br>
          <span>to work thy Sovran will; thus all shall trow</span>
          <br>
          <span>what things befall them, Whence and When and How.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>All favour thou in Duty’s different way,<span class="linenum">150</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">as in each life the storèd talent lies:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Let the Religious for thy gov’ernance pray,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and beg a blessing on each high emprize;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">fast they and fash their flesh for those who stray</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">in vulgar vices, and as wind despise</span>
          <br>
          <span>Ambition, ne’er shall holy Priest mislead</span>
          <br>
          <span>glare of vain-glory, nor of gain the greed.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_414">[Pg 414]</span> Foster the Cavaliers with fair esteem,<span class="linenum">151</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">that oft their fearless, fiery blood have lent</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to spread not only Heaven’s law supreme,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">but eke thy royal Rule pre-eminent.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Such men who fare to face each fell extreme</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">of climate in thy cause aye diligent,</span>
          <br>
          <span>conquer a double foe; the fone that live,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and (deadlier task) with dark, dumb danger strive.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>So do, my Sire! that sons of famous lands<span class="linenum">152</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Britons, Italians, Germans and the Gaul,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">ne’er vaunt that might of mortal man commands</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thy Portingalls, who should command them all.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Take counsel only with experienced hands,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">men who long years, long moons, saw rise and fall:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Many for gen’eral science fitness show,</span>
          <br>
          <span>yet the partic’ulars none save experts know.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Elegant Phormion’s philosophick store,<span class="linenum">153</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">see how the practised Hannibal deridèd,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">when lectured he with wealth of bellick lore</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">and on big words and books himself he pridèd.</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Senhor! the Soldier’s discipline is more</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">than men may learn by mother-fancy guidèd:</span>
          <br>
          <span>Not musing, dreaming, reading what they write;</span>
          <br>
          <span>’tis seeing, doing, fighting, teach to fight.</span>
        </p>
        <p>

          <span><span class="pagenum" id="Page_415">[Pg 415]</span> But I, what dare I say, rude, humble, low,<span class="linenum">154</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">to thee unknown, yes, even in thy dreams?</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Yet oft from lips of Babes and Sucklings flow,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">I trow, the words of wisdom man esteems:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Right honest studies my career can show</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">with long Experience blent as best beseems,</span>
          <br>
          <span>and Genius here presentèd for thy view;—</span>
          <br>
          <span>gifts, that conjoinèd appertain to few.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>For serving thee an arm to Arms addrest;<span class="linenum">155</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">for singing thee a soul the Muses raise;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">nought lacks me save of thee to stand confest,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">whose duty ’tis the Good to prize and praise:</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">If Heav’en concede me this, and if thy breast</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">deign incept worthy of a Poet’s lays;—</span>
          <br>
          <span>as doth presage my spirit vaticine</span>
          <br>
          <span>viewing thee pace the human path divine:—</span>
        </p>
        <p>
          <span>Or do’ing such derring-do, that ne’er Meduse<span class="linenum">156</span></span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">shall Atlas-mountain like thy glances shake,</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">or battling on the plains of Ampeluse</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">Marocco’s mures<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-126" id="noteref-126">[126]</a> and Terodant
            to break;</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">my now esteemèd and rejoicing Muse</span>
          <br>
          <span class="i2">thy name o’er Earth, I swear, so famed shall make,</span>
          <br>
          <span>an Alexander shall in Thee be shown</span>
          <br>
          <span>who of Achilles envy ne’er shall own.</span>
        </p>
      </div></blockquote>
    </section>

    <section id="canto-x-endnotes">

      <h3>Canto X. Endnotes.</h3>

      <ol start="45">

        <li id="note-45">
          <p>The Pacific, west of “Temistitam” (Tenochtitlan, Mexico). <a href="#noteref-45" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-46">
          <p>The Magic Mirror (Canto VIII. 45). <a href="#noteref-46" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-47">
          <p>Da Gama’s second voyage. <a href="#noteref-47" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-48">
          <p>Trimumpára, Rajah of Cochin. <a href="#noteref-48" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-49">
          <p>“Conqueror of the Indies.” <a href="#noteref-49" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-50">
          <p>At the mouth of the Cochin Backwater. <a href="#noteref-50" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-51">
          <p>Rajahship south of Cochin. <a href="#noteref-51" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-52">
          <p>The Samorim. <a href="#noteref-52" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-53">
          <p>Dom Francisco d’Almeida, first Viceroy. <a href="#noteref-53" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-54">
          <p>Lucan, VI. 251, etc. <a href="#noteref-54" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-55">
          <p>Chief Harbour of Bijapur. <a href="#noteref-55" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-56">
          <p>Islet in the Gulf of Cutch, governed by Malik Iyáz. <a href="#noteref-56" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-57">
          <p>Mir Husayn, the Turk. <a href="#noteref-57" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-58">
          <p>38 <i>a</i>. Not in Camoens. <a href="#noteref-58" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-59">
          <p>Madagascar. <a href="#noteref-59" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-60">
          <p>On Ormuz or Hormuz Isle. <a href="#noteref-60" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-61">
          <p>Bahrayn Island. <a href="#noteref-61" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-62">
          <p>Nov. 25, 1510. <a href="#noteref-62" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-63">
          <p>The Malay “crease.” <a href="#noteref-63" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-64">
          <p>Alludes to the hanging of Ruy Dias. <a href="#noteref-64" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-65">
          <p>Succeeded Soares, <span class="smcap">A.D.</span> 1518. <a href="#noteref-65" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-66">
          <p>Hod. Masawwah Island. <a href="#noteref-66" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-67">
          <p>D. Duarte, <span class="smcap">A.D.</span> 1522. <a href="#noteref-67" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-68">
          <p>D. Henrique, <span class="smcap">A.D.</span> 1525. <a href="#noteref-68" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-69">
          <p>D. Pedro, <span class="smcap">A.D.</span> 1526. <a href="#noteref-69" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-70">
          <p>Java. <a href="#noteref-70" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-71">
          <p>Lope Vaz S., the Usurper. <a href="#noteref-71" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-72">
          <p>The Moslem Admiral. <a href="#noteref-72" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-73">
          <p>D. Nuno, <span class="smcap">A.D.</span> 1529. <a href="#noteref-73" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-74">
          <p>Bahádur Sháh, King of Cambay. <a href="#noteref-74" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-75">
          <p>D. Garcia, <span class="smcap">A.D.</span> 1539. <a href="#noteref-75" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-76">
          <p>Estevam da Gama, <span class="smcap">A.D.</span> 1540. <a href="#noteref-76" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-77">
          <p>Villegagnon, expelled by Martim (Martinho) Afonso de Souza, chosen <span class="smcap">A.D.</span> 1542. <a href="#noteref-77" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-78">
          <p>Now Sadashivgarh. <a href="#noteref-78" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-79">
          <p>D. Joam de Castro (<span class="smcap">A.D.</span> 1545) worthily ends the Viceroys. <a href="#noteref-79" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-80">
          <p>Commanding Diu fort. <a href="#noteref-80" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-81">
          <p>Rahádur Sháh of Gujarát. <a href="#noteref-81" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-82">
          <p>Elephants. <a href="#noteref-82" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-83">
          <p>Adil Sháh of Bijápúr. <a href="#noteref-83" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-84">
          <p>The Solar System (Ptolemeian). <a href="#noteref-84" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-85">
          <p>Or Imperial: No. 11 sphere, “sensorium of the Deity.” <a href="#noteref-85" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-86">
          <p>A couplet for “The Spiritualist.” <a href="#noteref-86" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-87">
          <p>First mover, <i>i.e.</i> source of motion: Sphere No. 10. <a href="#noteref-87" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-88">
          <p><i>i.e.</i> moving the orbs from east to west. <a href="#noteref-88" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-89">
          <p>Crystalline Sphere (No. 9), revolving in 49,000 years. <a href="#noteref-89" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-90">
          <p>Firmament or Zodiac: Sphere No. 8. <a href="#noteref-90" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-91">
          <p><i>In orig.</i> Posada, <i>i.e.</i>, not a home. <a href="#noteref-91" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-92">
          <p>The Jesuit G. da Silveira, <span class="smcap">A.D.</span> 1561. <a href="#noteref-92" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-93">
          <p>The Zambeze. <a href="#noteref-93" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-94">
          <p>95<i>a</i>. Not in Camoens.</p>

          <blockquote class="poetry"><div>
            <p>
              <span>“And see yon twain from Britain’s foggy shore</span>
              <br>
              <span class="i2">set forth dark Africk’s jungle-plain to span;</span>
              <br>
              <span class="i2">thy furthest fount, O Nilus! they explore,</span>
              <br>
              <span class="i2">and where Zaïré springs to seek the Main:</span>
              <br>
              <span class="i2">The Veil of Isis hides thy land no more,</span>
              <br>
              <span class="i2">whose ways wide open to the world are lain:</span>
              <br>
              <span>They deem, vain fools! to win fair <span class="smcap">Honour’s</span> prize:—</span>
              <br>
              <span>This exiled lives, and that untimely dies. <a href="#noteref-94" class="pginternal">↩</a></span>
            </p>
          </div></blockquote>
        </li>

        <li id="note-95">
          <p>Rufiji river (of “sewn boats”). <a href="#noteref-95" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-96">
          <p>Of vulgar error. <a href="#noteref-96" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-97">
          <p>Arab horses. <a href="#noteref-97" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-98">
          <p>Ras el-Hadd. <a href="#noteref-98" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-99">
          <p>D. Pedro de C., Governor of Hormuz. <a href="#noteref-99" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-100">
          <p>Paragoge for Lár. <a href="#noteref-100" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-101">
          <p>On the Zanzibar Coast. <a href="#noteref-101" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-102">
          <p>Sind; the “Bore” (flood-tide), and Cutch Gulf. <a href="#noteref-102" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-103">
          <p>Indus and Ganges. <a href="#noteref-103" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-104">
          <p>The Brahminical cord. <a href="#noteref-104" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-105">
          <p>Chittagong. <a href="#noteref-105" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-106">
          <p>Tavoy, in Tenasserim. <a href="#noteref-106" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-107">
          <p>Malaccan Pa-ang, and Patani. <a href="#noteref-107" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-108">
          <p>Burmans. <a href="#noteref-108" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-109">
          <p>The Karen tribe. <a href="#noteref-109" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-110">
          <p>The singer personifies himself as “Song.” <a href="#noteref-110" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-111">
          <p>The seaboard of Cochin China. <a href="#noteref-111" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-112">
          <p>Hainan. <a href="#noteref-112" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-113">
          <p>Malasia. <a href="#noteref-113" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-114">
          <p><i>i.e.</i>, be applied to missions. <a href="#noteref-114" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-115">
          <p>Java. <a href="#noteref-115" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-116">
          <p>We now return westward to Sumatra. <a href="#noteref-116" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-117">
          <p>Styrax benzoin (gum benjamin). <a href="#noteref-117" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-118">
          <p>Adam’s Peak. <a href="#noteref-118" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-119">
          <p>The Coco-de-mer. <a href="#noteref-119" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-120">
          <p>Ambergris. <a href="#noteref-120" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-121">
          <p>Magellan. <a href="#noteref-121" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-122">
          <p>S. Cruz (= The Brazil) found by Cabral, <span class="smcap">A.D.</span>
            1500. <a href="#noteref-122" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-123">
          <p>The Patagonians. <a href="#noteref-123" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-124">
          <p>Australia (?) <a href="#noteref-124" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-125">
          <p>Epilogue addressed to D. Sebastiam. <a href="#noteref-125" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-126">
          <p>Alii “Marroco’s Moors” (Mouros). <a href="#noteref-126" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </section>
  </section>

  <hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop">

  <section id="rejected-stanzas">
    <header>
      <h2>The Rejected Stanzas.</h2>
      <p class="uppercase center">(Estancias Desprezadas)</p>
    </header>

    <section id="rejected-stanzas-note">

      <p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_418"></a><a id="Page_419"></a>[Pg 419]</span></p>
      <h3>Note.</h3>

      <p>These Stanzas, omitted by Camoens, were discovered
        by Manoel de Faria y Sousa, and published in his Commentaries
        (Juan Sanches, 1639). The whole are extant
        in three manuscripts. Number I., the better of the two
        first, contains only six cantos: Number II., belonging
        to M. Correia Montenegro, embraces the whole poem.
        The third MS., in the hands of M. Luiz Franco, is given
        by Viscount Juromenha (Vol. VI. 419). It has only
        four “rejected stanzas”; the first three are those of Faria
        y Sousa; and the fourth is that of the established text
        (Canto I. 79) with a few unimportant changes of words
        and rhymes.</p>

      <p>The Stanzas number:—</p>

      <table>
        <tbody>
          <tr>
            <td><abbr title="Manuscript">MS.</abbr></td>
            <td><abbr title="Number">No.</abbr></td>
            <td>1,</td>
            <td>48 + 2 fragments</td>
            <td class="center pad-left">=</td>
            <td class="right pad-left">49</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td class="center">”</td>
            <td class="center">”</td>
            <td>2,</td>
            <td>(Correia Montenegro’s)</td>
            <td class="center pad-left">=</td>
            <td class="right pad-left">26</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td class="center">”</td>
            <td class="center">”</td>
            <td>3,</td>
            <td>(Luiz Franco’s)</td>
            <td class="center pad-left">=</td>
            <td class="right pad-left">4</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td class="right pad-left" colspan="5">Total</td>
            <td class="right pad-left border-top">79</td>
          </tr>
        </tbody>
      </table>

      <p>I will not here enter into the consideration why the
        Stanzas were left out. Many of them fully equal those
        retained in the popular “Lusiads”; but almost all contain
        something opposed to public, or rather to priestly,
        sentiment. A cursory glance shows that not a few want
        the polish and finish which distinguish the Poem. I
        have purposely followed suit for the sake of contrast and
        fidelity. Juromenha’s original text is printed <i>in verso</i>,
        that the reader may judge how literal is my version,
        which, for additional security, was submitted to Mr. J.
        J. Aubertin, the translator of “The Lusiads.”</p>
    </section>

    <section id="rejected-stanzas-body">

      <p><span class="pagenum" id="Page_420">[Pg 420]</span></p>

      <h3>Rejected Stanzas.</h3>

      <table>
        <tbody><tr class="mid-header">
          <td><span class="smcap">Manuscript No. 1.</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td colspan="2">Canto I. Stanza 77 (modified).</td>
        </tr>



        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">1</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>He spake in fury wood, like wight insane,</span>
            <br>
            <span>And straight alighted on the Theban way,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Where mortal gest and human vesture tane,</span>
            <br>
            <span>He bore where new-born Phœbus bears the Day.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Now spans his flight the Med’iterranean Main,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Now spurns the bounds of Cleopatra’s sway;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Now leaves to right the Garamántes-land,</span>
            <br>
            <span>And circumjacent sheets of Libyan sand.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">2</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>Now leaves he Mer’oe ’mid the fiery downs,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Fed by the waters of the Sev’en-flood River,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Realms which the high and holy President<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-127" id="noteref-127">[127]</a> owns,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of Christ His doctrine old and true Believer:</span>
            <br>
            <span>He passes drouthy land whose people wones</span>
            <br>
            <span>Lacking the Lakes that roll their waters ever;</span>
            <br>
            <span>The very birth-place of the secret Nyle</span>
            <br>
            <span>Who breeds the monstrous brood of crocodile.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">3</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> Hence to the Prasum Headland fast he flies;</span>
            <br>
            <span>And, making Mozambíque, in briefest space</span>
            <br>
            <span> Becomes the Counterfeit, in Moorman guise,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of one that held high honourable place.</span>
            <br>
            <span>And, as the Regent much this Moor did prize,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Entering with somewhat sad and chargèd face,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Began the Theban thus his plaint to make,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Removing others who sat near the Shaykh.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto I. (after Stanza 80).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “And eke, that credit these my words befall,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Showing what plotteth yon false Capitayne,</span>
            <br>
            <span> Know, when thou wendedst on thy guest to call</span>
            <br>
            <span>I heard this case debated ’twixt a twain:</span>
            <br>
            <span>In what I tell thee make no interval,</span>
            <br>
            <span>And I will truly tell thee how, where, when,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Thou canst destroy them; for I lief believe</span>
            <br>
            <span>We should deceive him who would us deceive.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto III. (after Stanza 10).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “Between this Ocean, and the waters shed</span>
            <br>
            <span>To feed large Tanaïs, flowing ceaseless flood,</span>
            <br>
            <span> Dwell the Sarmatæ races, who are fed</span>
            <br>
            <span>On mare-milk diet mixt with purpling blood.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Here live the Mysian peoples that o’erspread</span>
            <br>
            <span>A part of Asia, low, inglorious brood;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Abii who banish women; and with these</span>
            <br>
            <span>A host of tribes that drink Borysthenes.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto III.<span class="pagenum" id="Page_424">[Pg 424]</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “But his ill mother following whither led</span>
            <br>
            <span>Her woman’s bosom ready aye to range,</span>
            <br>
            <span> Took Dom Bermudo to her marriage-bed,—</span>
            <br>
            <span>And Dom Bermudo’s brother takes in change.</span>
            <br>
            <span>See the foul, sinful, bestial action bred</span>
            <br>
            <span>By crime begetting crime! Strange, mighty strange!</span>
            <br>
            <span>That left her husband she remains for e’er</span>
            <br>
            <span>His marriage-sister and his married fere.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 2).
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td></td>
          <td>Translated in the Millié-Dubeux edit. of 1862.</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“The meed of valour Bastards aye have claimèd</span>
            <br>
            <span>By Arts or Arms, or haply both conjoinèd;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Such were of fabled Gods the most enfamèd</span>
            <br>
            <span>To whom rude Antients highest rank assignèd.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Hermes, and doct Apollo still are namèd</span>
            <br>
            <span>For varied Science with long Art combinèd;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Others by Arms alone prevail; so reign</span>
            <br>
            <span>Bacchus and Hercules, that Theban Twain.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">2</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Homer and Orpheus, eke, of birth were base,</span>
            <br>
            <span>The pair by Po’etry raised to such degree;</span>
            <br>
            <span>And they, the Sires of that Imperial race,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Who founded Troy and Rome for Italy.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Nay, an in written legend trust we place,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Though many Philip made the father be</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of Macedonia’s Youth, not few would prove</span>
            <br>
            <span>Great Nectanébus<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-128" id="noteref-128">[128]</a>filcht his mother’s
              love.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">3</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
          <td>
            <span> “Thus Justiciary Pedro’s bastard son,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Being exalted o’er the realm to sway,</span>
            <br>
            <span> By Gestes of arms such goods of Fortune won</span>
            <br>
            <span>That equalled ev’ery Great of bygone day.</span>
            <br>
            <span>He, when his kingdom feared to be undone</span>
            <br>
            <span>And prostrate lie, the proud Castilian’s prey,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Bateth the terror his own lieges tries;</span>
            <br>
            <span>And in all others Esp’erance falsifies.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 11).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td>Omitted because Catalonia and Arragon<br> did not then belong to
            Castile (?).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “Remainèd none in realm of Tarragon</span>
            <br>
            <span>Who shirkt to mell in Mavors’ dour emprize:</span>
            <br>
            <span> None in the noble City, whose renown</span>
            <br>
            <span>Upon her founder Scipio’s name relies.</span>
            <br>
            <span>And last not least the far-famed Barcelon</span>
            <br>
            <span>Sent warmen tried in warlike exercise:</span>
            <br>
            <span>All these strong powers uniteth haughty Spain</span>
            <br>
            <span>Against our little Lusitanian reign.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 13).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “Oh, foes unnat’ural! Nature so misbred,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Race of thy race’s name disgrace that art!</span>
            <br>
            <span> Degenerates! caitiffs! say what feeble Dread,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Sans wisdom, reason, all Man’s better part,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Have made a gallant people, born and bred</span>
            <br>
            <span>Loyal and brave with clean and candid heart,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Offend in such base guise? But I suspect</span>
            <br>
            <span>Amid the Great this be the least defect.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto IV. (in lieu of Stanza 21).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “E’en as the noble Youth of Roman strain</span>
            <br>
            <span>Strengthend the Senate, fain in fear to fly</span>
            <br>
            <span> The Carthaginian who, all-sovereign,</span>
            <br>
            <span>His whetted blade to shrinking throats brought nigh;</span>
            <br>
            <span>When worth’ily winning surname ‘African,’</span>
            <br>
            <span>His furious force so did their force defy,</span>
            <br>
            <span>His doubtful country free as air he made</span>
            <br>
            <span>When jealous Fabius still his rede delay’d.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 27).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>

          <td>
            <span> “Now Titan’s daughter fresh and rosy came</span>
            <br>
            <span>Bringing that memorable, deathless day,</span>
            <br>
            <span> When Vespers chaunted are in Mary’s name,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Hon’ouring the holy month whose name is May.</span>
            <br>
            <span>This day for battle having fittest claim</span>
            <br>
            <span>Was chosen: Now, as paled the morning Gray</span>
            <br>
            <span>Bleaching the skies, both Kings unsheathed their swords</span>
            <br>
            <span>Their hosts enheartening with hearty words.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">

          <td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 33).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “And, Emperors! you that held and had command</span>
            <br>
            <span>O’er so much Earth, aye ready to resist</span>
            <br>
            <span> In asp’erous conflict, and the wrong withstand</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of cruel Traitors raising Treason’s crest:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Complain ye not: Nay, well this chance attend,</span>
            <br>
            <span>One of the noblest Kings, and loved the best,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Sees ’gainst his law, his crown, his self, his all,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Vavasors rise to sue a stranger’s thrall.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto IV.</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padb left">These Homeric stanzas on the deaths of Portuguese<br> knights took
            away interest from the central<br> figure, the King.</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Piercèd<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-129" id="noteref-129">[129]</a>
              Giraldo’s
              vitals through and through</span>
            <br>
            <span>And eke the huge thick targe he snatcht away</span>
            <br>
            <span>From Perez whom he killed; his own with hew</span>
            <br>
            <span>And strangest hack of cutlass useless lay.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Dies Pedro, and Duarte dies (in lieu</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of death amid the Brigians): Born were they</span>
            <br>
            <span>Both in Braganza, brave in youthful pride</span>
            <br>
            <span>Together lived they, fought they, fell they, died.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">2</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Lopo and Vincent de Lisbóa bleed;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Sworn in the common cause to meet their fate;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Or both the crown to gain and Victory’s meed</span>
            <br>
            <span>To snatch from all whom most enfamed this bate.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Afonso flieth from his battle-steed;</span>
            <br>
            <span>For five Castilians (who in ambush wait</span>
            <br>
            <span>to ’venge five comrades slain in earli’er strife)</span>
            <br>
            <span>Packing around him pluck his precious life.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">3</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Down falls Hilario drilled by spear-heads three;</span>
            <br>
            <span>But first he took the vengeance of his spear;</span>
            <br>
            <span>He mourneth not because his Sprite goes free,</span>
            <br>
            <span>But for-that comes in it Antonia fair:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Flitteth the fug’itive Spirit fast, and flee</span>
            <br>
            <span>With it the thoughts sustaining all to dare;</span>
            <br>
            <span>And as life fled the service of his dame,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Fell from his clay-cold lips her broken name.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto IV. (in lieu of Stanza 39).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “His foll’owers favour with a piercing cry</span>
            <br>
            <span>This goodly lunge of lance; nor is he slow</span>
            <br>
            <span> To snatch another (for innum’erous lie</span>
            <br>
            <span>The weapons lost by battle’s losing throw):</span>
            <br>
            <span>He runs with couchèd spear: His bravery</span>
            <br>
            <span>Urgeth his Braves who, brent with martial lowe,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Into the courser’s flanks keen rowels thrust,</span>
            <br>
            <span>And lance the foeman level with the dust.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 40).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">1</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td></td>

          <td>The corresponding deaths of Spanish knights.</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
          <td>
            <span>“Velasquez dies with Sanches de Toledo,</span>
            <br>
            <span>A mighty hunter this, and that a clerke:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Galbes eke perisheth surnamed ‘Sem Medo,’<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-130" id="noteref-130">[130]</a></span>
            <br>
            <span>For thus his comrades called for countermark:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Montánchez, Oropésa, Mondonhedo</span>
            <br>
            <span>(Albeit skilled in arms, in sinews stark),</span>
            <br>
            <span>Fell by Antonio’s hand, stout youth and brave</span>
            <br>
            <span>Whose lance more dext’erous drave them to the grave.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">2</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Braggart Guevára, who his front had dyed,</span>
            <br>
            <span>And hands and beard with blood that tinged the plain;</span>
            <br>
            <span>That he might bluster how the gory tide</span>
            <br>
            <span>Had spurted painting him with honour’d stain:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Him, bell’owing such bravados in his pride,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Pedro who heard the vauntings loud and vain,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Felled with such side stroke, that his empty head</span>
            <br>
            <span>Flew from his body and his base life fled.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">3</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Flew high in airy space his feckless pate</span>
            <br>
            <span>While still a-boasting of some blatant Geste:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Pedro, besprinkled by the squirt and jet,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Feels black blood trickling down his beard and breast;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Wherewith the mal’apert pays his vengeance debt.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Carrilho’s sun eke setteth in its west,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Joam de Lorca and Robledo follow;</span>
            <br>
            <span>While th’ other braves in flight their boasts must swallow.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">4</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
          <td>
            <span>“Salazar, famous par’asite, and the head</span>
            <br>
            <span>Pander who made Sevilha town infame;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Whom his false leman had at night-tide fled</span>
            <br>
            <span>Though to the ’campment she had brought her shame;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Lief would with other friend this fair friend bed,</span>
            <br>
            <span>For-that the ducats wherewithal he came,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Were lost upon a cast; nor were they lost</span>
            <br>
            <span>Had but a hand of spades came uppermost.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">5</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“His she-friend’s treason gars him wits to tyne;</span>
            <br>
            <span>And threaten un’iverse, earth and vagueing skies</span>
            <br>
            <span>Blaspheming; and resolve with rage indign</span>
            <br>
            <span>All who dare cross his valour to chastise:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Encount’ering Gaspar (who his Catherine</span>
            <br>
            <span>Loves as his life) the broadsword fast he plies,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Till air fire-smitten makes him fain believe</span>
            <br>
            <span>Such stroke of mighty blade a hill could cleave.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">6</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Fondly he hopes the foe to hew in twain;</span>
            <br>
            <span>But Gaspar, sighting overhead the blade,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Runs in, and catcheth him with gripping strain:</span>
            <br>
            <span>’Twas a fair feat of skill and hardihead:</span>
            <br>
            <span>The Spaniard clippeth, yet doth not restrain</span>
            <br>
            <span>His boastful threat’ening, although conquerèd;</span>
            <br>
            <span>The forceful Portingall with short delay</span>
            <br>
            <span>Unarms his hands and leaps from out his way.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">7</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
          <td>
            <span>“Then, lest his foeman use such crafty mode</span>
            <br>
            <span>Himself had used, he deals stoccado-thrust:</span>
            <br>
            <span>In fine the broadsword in his bosom-blood</span>
            <br>
            <span>He bathes that naught to vengeance mote he trust.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Flieth the furious ghost and in the wood</span>
            <br>
            <span>Tartarean still blasphemes; relates his lust</span>
            <br>
            <span>For vengeance, who no more can scourge his quean,</span>
            <br>
            <span>While him Alecto scourgeth long and keen.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">8</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“The Spatha’s<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-131" id="noteref-131">[131]</a>
              metal to
              the damnèd host</span>
            <br>
            <span>Ill-names he calleth heaping curses dread;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Which, when it entered not, his ducats lost,</span>
            <br>
            <span>And lost his life when it had enterèd.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Pluto to gar him pay Sin’s scot and cost,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Shows him the trait’orous ladye-friend who fled</span>
            <br>
            <span>’Joyed by his rival raining greedy kisses:—</span>
            <br>
            <span>He starts to strike them but the Shades he misses.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">

          <td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 44).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Oh vain reflections’ guiling human sense!</span>
            <br>
            <span>How could this darkling error seal your sight?</span>
            <br>
            <span>How have ye hugged this gay and glad pretence</span>
            <br>
            <span>That lures to ’sanguined hate and baneful fight?</span>
            <br>
            <span>And now of bloodshed dour experience,</span>
            <br>
            <span>A sore dread trial of the deadly blight</span>
            <br>
            <span>Is shown to thee. And now when known thy lot</span>
            <br>
            <span>Thou shalt give counsel which thou tookest not.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">2</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“The corpses of the Cavaliers, our fone,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Fed the foul creatures of the field and wood:</span>
            <br>
            <span>The nearest fountains till some days were gone</span>
            <br>
            <span>Distilled their chrystal black with human blood.</span>
            <br>
            <span>The meadow-shepherds, and the swains who wone</span>
            <br>
            <span>Upon the mountain, loathed the fulsome food,</span>
            <br>
            <span>The feral bird,—which for a year and more,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Smackt of the gorgèd flesh and human gore.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto IV. (Stanza 49: <i>varia lectio</i>).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>Pond’ering such mighty deeds of derring-do</span>
            <br>
            <span>Prophetick Proteus thus to Neptune cried:—</span>
            <br>
            <span> “I fear shall spring such Braves from Braves like these</span>
            <br>
            <span>Who the great sceptre of thy Reigns shall seize!”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">2</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“He gaineth now the Porte inexpugnable</span>
            <br>
            <span>Whereof the Traitor-Count<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-132a" id="noteref-132a">[132a]</a> first oped
              the gate,</span>
            <br>
            <span>In blood to wash the love inevitable</span>
            <br>
            <span>Fired in Rodrigo’s<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-132b" id="noteref-132b">[132b]</a> heart by hand of
              Fate.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Yet this was not the cause abominable</span>
            <br>
            <span>That wasted populous Hispanian State:</span>
            <br>
            <span>God for some hidden judgment gave command</span>
            <br>
            <span>The house be opened by Rodrigo’s hand.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">3</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“But now thou livest safe, O noble Spain!</span>
            <br>
            <span>(If knightly force can save its land a fall)</span>
            <br>
            <span>From other loss like this, from shame and stain,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Who for a Porter hast the Portingall.</span>
            <br>
            <span>This happy Fortune waited on the reign</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of King Joanné,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-133" id="noteref-133">[133]</a>
              who the
              bounding wall</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of Spanish-lond molested many years;</span>
            <br>
            <span>And conquerèd a higher crest uprears.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto IV. (Stanza 61: <i>varia lectio</i>).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “Of Venice, splendid in prosperity,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Venice, whereto the fisher peoples fled</span>
            <br>
            <span> From Gothic fury, and the cruelty</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of Attila, and built the pauper town</span>
            <br>
            <span>Now raised to rich estate and high renown.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 66).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “Nor chosen was sans justest cause and care</span>
            <br>
            <span>To fill the lofty throne of governance,</span>
            <br>
            <span> This King, whose noble heart and spirit rare</span>
            <br>
            <span>Pledgèd and promised highest esperance:</span>
            <br>
            <span>For him, there being no directer heir</span>
            <br>
            <span>And urgèd mostly by such confidence,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Joanné chose as heir to reign alone,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Having no son-inheritor to the throne.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 86).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“There did we promise, if His mercy deign</span>
            <br>
            <span>To bear us safe where Phœbus bursts the womb,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Or to blind worlds we would His faith ordain,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Or headstrong Heathenesse to death would doom.</span>
            <br>
            <span>All for our Souls’ eternal health were fain</span>
            <br>
            <span>With pure, veracious shrift our Sprites t’ illume,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Whereby, though Her’eticks may its power decry,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Souls like the ren’ovate Phœnix heav’enward fly.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">2</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Then to partake of Ghostly Meat we went,</span>
            <br>
            <span>By whose most gracious boon so many days,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Sans taste of other earthly nutriment,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Erst were sustained Elias and Moysès:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Bread, whose deep secrets ne thought eminent</span>
            <br>
            <span>Ne subtle lore, ne soaring phantasies</span>
            <br>
            <span>Shall ever fathom, ever plumb its might,</span>
            <br>
            <span>An to dark Reason Faith deny her light.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto VI. (after Stanza 7).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> There, in sublime Italia, yawns a cave,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Secret and celebrate, Avernus hight,</span>
            <br>
            <span> Wherethrough the Trojan leader bold and brave</span>
            <br>
            <span>Gainèd Infernus-realm of gloomy Night.</span>
            <br>
            <span>And als this Antre easy adit gave,</span>
            <br>
            <span>By road untrod, to Ocean’s middle site,</span>
            <br>
            <span>The Sea-god Neptune’s proper tenement:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Now thither Bacchus ’gan the long descent.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto VI. (after Stanza 24).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> Dolour of fell Dislove hath no respect</span>
            <br>
            <span>For fault or for unfault on either part;</span>
            <br>
            <span> If what thou lovest lief thy love reject</span>
            <br>
            <span>Only some sore revenge shall salve the smart.</span>
            <br>
            <span>But say, What profit shall thy love expect,</span>
            <br>
            <span>When she thou lovest hath bestowed her heart?</span>
            <br>
            <span>How shall for others Love himself deny</span>
            <br>
            <span>When Love delights his foll’owers aye to fly?</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto VI. (after Stanza 40).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “What boots recounting feats and gestes notorious</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of cel’ebrate Capitaynes and grand campaigns,</span>
            <br>
            <span> Where vaunting Death boasts asp’erous might victorious</span>
            <br>
            <span>O’er alien will he bendeth as he fain ’is?</span>
            <br>
            <span>Let others sing and say the deeds memorious</span>
            <br>
            <span>Achieved by Conq’uerors on their battle-plains:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Let it be mine (if worlds will hear) to tell</span>
            <br>
            <span>How by a pair of eyes’ mere force I fell.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">2</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>No little pleasure to Velloso gave</span>
            <br>
            <span>So fair a subject watch and ward to ’guile,</span>
            <br>
            <span>For as dure warfare made him dour and brave,</span>
            <br>
            <span>So gentled Love his breast by soft’ening wile.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Such is the cunning of this Cupid-knave,</span>
            <br>
            <span>So Art with Nature can he reconcile,</span>
            <br>
            <span>While mortal hearts with blandness it endowereth,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Lovers with double pow’er his will empowereth.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">3</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Recount” (quoth he), “recount of Love, fair Sir!</span>
            <br>
            <span>And of the wondrous chances Love befel,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Still his sharp arrows this sad bosom stir</span>
            <br>
            <span>That may not hurt of open wound dispel.”</span>
            <br>
            <span>With him agreed each watchful mariner,</span>
            <br>
            <span>That all and ev’ery, then and there, should tell</span>
            <br>
            <span>Their tales of Love, and how the ventures farèd:—</span>
            <br>
            <span>Thiswise its watch to keep the crew preparèd.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">4</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>Then quoth Le’onardo: “Here let no man wot</span>
            <br>
            <span>From me to gather fables known of yore:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Whoso would quote the tears of alien lot</span>
            <br>
            <span>Himself exempted hath no tears in store.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Sith Love with magick eye-glance mortals smote</span>
            <br>
            <span>Those dearest en’emies mine smote none so sore</span>
            <br>
            <span>’Mid men as me; nor Pyramus nor him</span>
            <br>
            <span>Who from Abydos Helle’s stream did swim.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">5</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Fortune, who vaunteth o’er the world her might</span>
            <br>
            <span>Already drave me far from Fatherland,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Where I long time had lived, sufficient quite</span>
            <br>
            <span>To lose a blessing which I held in hand.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Yes, free I lived; yet nought astounds my sprite</span>
            <br>
            <span>Save that my freedom I could not command,</span>
            <br>
            <span>But changed for prison, since mine every thought,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Would I or nould I, boon of Love besought.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto VI. (after Stanza 81).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “Thou Guard divine, who dost with Angels dwell,</span>
            <br>
            <span>And of the Starry Pole hast seigniory;</span>
            <br>
            <span> Thou who didst bring Thy people Israèl</span>
            <br>
            <span>Through the burst waters of the blushing sea:</span>
            <br>
            <span>If from more risks than what t’ Æneas fell</span>
            <br>
            <span>Or Ithican Ulysses sav’edst thou me,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Passing Apollo’s largely bounded path</span>
            <br>
            <span>Through rage of Æolus and Tethys’ wrath.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto VI. (after Stanza 94).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> Look ye, how following fast on fierce despair</span>
            <br>
            <span>We win the weal that seemed beyond our range;</span>
            <br>
            <span> Thus ever dogging happy days sans care</span>
            <br>
            <span>Comes hateful Sorrow with her certain change.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Whoso would win such lore, such secret bare,</span>
            <br>
            <span>How Chance shall aye Security estrange,</span>
            <br>
            <span>I wot, his wisdom would no blessing gain,</span>
            <br>
            <span>But breed a madness in his brooding brain.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">2</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>I have short answer for the wights who say</span>
            <br>
            <span>That fickle Fortune deals in living lies;</span>
            <br>
            <span>That God hath made for pillar of His sway</span>
            <br>
            <span>A goddess ranging aye ’twixt fall and rise.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Importunate opinion men obey</span>
            <br>
            <span>That Man, whose nature with the Angels vies,</span>
            <br>
            <span>For whom his God such goodness wrought, is rulèd</span>
            <br>
            <span>By blindfold chances, and by luck befoolèd.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">3</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>Who saith that Good or Ill be reason why,</span>
            <br>
            <span>The lowly up, the lofty downward, go;</span>
            <br>
            <span>What shall he say me se’eing the low rise high?</span>
            <br>
            <span>What shall he say me se’eing the high fall low?</span>
            <br>
            <span>If some should say “we’re born predestined,” I</span>
            <br>
            <span>Find it an asp’erous reason so to trow;</span>
            <br>
            <span>If darkly bound by bond of Destiny,</span>
            <br>
            <span>What boots a Sinner or a Saint I be?</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">4</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>Such dreadful storm the Portingalls tormented,</span>
            <br>
            <span>All were assurèd life was surely lost;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Sudden it passèd and to them presented</span>
            <br>
            <span>Venus the guerdon which they yearned for most.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Meanwhile Cabral whose wreck and wrack distented</span>
            <br>
            <span>The list of losses on that portless coast,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Saves his life gladly, and at once he loses ’t</span>
            <br>
            <span>Because what men call Chance or Dest’iny choses ’t.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">5</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>An he must lose his life in one short hour,</span>
            <br>
            <span>To save the span before what could avail?</span>
            <br>
            <span>We ask why Fortune’s all prevailing pow’er</span>
            <br>
            <span>Upon the heels of ill sent nought of weal?</span>
            <br>
            <span>Well said the Sage, so famed for el’egant lore,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Simonides, who from his safe portail</span>
            <br>
            <span>Beheld his rev’elling friends within the hall</span>
            <br>
            <span>Crusht by the fragments of the fallen wall:—</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">6</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Oh, force of Fortune grievous, sore to dree,</span>
            <br>
            <span>That hast so many in one moment slain!</span>
            <br>
            <span>Say for what greater bane hast savèd me</span>
            <br>
            <span>Whom thou hast savèd from this present bane?</span>
            <br>
            <span>Certès, the wrath of Heav’en right well I see:</span>
            <br>
            <span>No harm sufficeth for his rage insane:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Nor ill he workèd but the will he had</span>
            <br>
            <span>Eftsoons of working something worse than bad.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">7</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>Right well I wot that many shall be found</span>
            <br>
            <span>With subtle reasons Faith to re-assure;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Many by Second Causes shall expound</span>
            <br>
            <span>High matters sound sure judgment doth depure.</span>
            <br>
            <span>To all I pledge myself, I could respond</span>
            <br>
            <span>Did art of scribe such mighty theme endure:</span>
            <br>
            <span>I but respond that long Experience</span>
            <br>
            <span>Oft shows your Science lacking common Sense.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="center" colspan="2"><span class="smcap">Manuscript No. II.</span></td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto VIII. (after Stanza 32).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">1</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“This the foundation-stone sublimely laid</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of the Braganza House, illustrious strain,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Which in estate and grandeur all outweigh’d</span>
            <br>
            <span>Whatever vaunts the high Hispanian reign.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Seest thou him, who with the stout Armade</span>
            <br>
            <span>Cutteth th’ Hesperian sea, forthwith to gain</span>
            <br>
            <span>His brave objective; wends this stout pretender</span>
            <br>
            <span>Azamor town to fight and gar surrender?</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">2</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“’Tis ducal Gemes, ’heriting from his sires</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of old nobility a name memorious,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Who does this mighty deed; and ’s high desires</span>
            <br>
            <span>Fulfilled, to Portugale returns victorious.</span>
            <br>
            <span>This time a valour which the world admires</span>
            <br>
            <span>Leaveth the Moorman in such fear inglorious,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Who to the Present is nowise relievèd</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of the cold burthen in the Past conceivèd.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">3</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
          <td>
            <span>“And, if the famous Duke forbore as wont</span>
            <br>
            <span>Catholick conquests farther still to bear,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Unto Marocco’s mures and Terudant,</span>
            <br>
            <span>And other thousand thorpes the Haven near;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Deem not his constant soul of spirit scant,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Or wanting energy or slow to dare;</span>
            <br>
            <span>’Twas that his loyalty to cross declinèd</span>
            <br>
            <span>The certain limits which his King assignèd.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto VIII.</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “In such unfairest odds and chance of fray</span>
            <br>
            <span>One of our soldiers was begirt by foes;</span>
            <br>
            <span> But he, by valour more than mail, makes way</span>
            <br>
            <span>And of true warrior-heart fair ’surance shows;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Slain the near charger with his sabre-sway</span>
            <br>
            <span>Its rider’s head upon the plain he throws;—</span>
            <br>
            <span>Brave sworder-feat!—and, pace by pace, he leaveth</span>
            <br>
            <span>Arear the foeman whom such exploit grieveth.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto X. (after Stanza 72).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Shalt see, in fine, conspire all India, ’drest</span>
            <br>
            <span>To bellick apparatus; peoples rush</span>
            <br>
            <span>Cháúl, Maláca, Goa-town t’ invest,</span>
            <br>
            <span>At once such different sites to seize and crush.</span>
            <br>
            <span>But see, now Cháúl City sorely prest,</span>
            <br>
            <span>The seas with em’inent billows flies to brush</span>
            <br>
            <span>Castro, in haste his Portingalls to save</span>
            <br>
            <span>When only God in Mercy’s aid they crave.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">2</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td><span>“Se’est thou yon Paynim King so fain of fight</span>
            <br>
            <span>Burn, overrun, beleaguer, firm persist</span>
            <br>
            <span>In throwing forces which the land affright</span>
            <br>
            <span>Against a little squad that loveth <span class="smcap">Christ</span>?</span>
            <br>
            <span>But bear that gen’erous Pundonor in sight,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Ne siege ne battle e’er before hath wist;</span>
            <br>
            <span>See how the sold’iery flying posts secure,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Pass to the post of peril dire and dure.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto VIII. (after Stanza 36).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“In such unfairest odds and chance of fray</span>
            <br>
            <span>One of our soldiers was begirt by foes;</span>
            <br>
            <span>But he, by valour more than mail, makes way</span>
            <br>
            <span>And of true warrior-heart fair ’surance shows;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Slain the near charger with his sabre-sway</span>
            <br>
            <span>Its rider’s head upon the plain he throws;—</span>
            <br>
            <span>Brave sworder-feat!—and, pace by pace, he leaveth</span>
            <br>
            <span>Arear the foeman whom such exploit grieveth.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">3</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“There shall Ataide, most for prudence known,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Strong in the ghostly comfort of the Lord,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Where Time and Need demand such force be shown,</span>
            <br>
            <span>With more than human valour aid afford.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Until its salvage object shall disown</span>
            <br>
            <span>With grievous losses yon vile Pagan horde,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Who crusht in thousand cruel fights shall rue</span>
            <br>
            <span>The war, and hurry for a truce to sue.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">4</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“While here so happeth on the coast that glows</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of Asia and Am’erica sombre cold,</span>
            <br>
            <span>There not the less in Europe bellicose,</span>
            <br>
            <span>And Barb’ary’s wild uncultivated wold,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Shall show thy Race, Elysian, valorous</span>
            <br>
            <span>Its worth and with a freezing fear enfold</span>
            <br>
            <span>The seething Zone, that sees one conquest won</span>
            <br>
            <span>Pass to three other and ne’er pause till done.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">5</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
          <td>
            <span>“Barriga, brave of braves, they here shall sight,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Guide of Zafim,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-134" id="noteref-134">[134]</a>
              in war
              of prime account,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Who finds no man-at-arms to foil his might,</span>
            <br>
            <span>O’errun the Mauritanian plain and mount.</span>
            <br>
            <span>But see how th’ Infidels, by luck of fight</span>
            <br>
            <span>And doom disastrous, in the very brunt</span>
            <br>
            <span>Make him and his Bellona’s battle-prize</span>
            <br>
            <span>For in such chances Valour hopeless lies.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">6</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“But past the perils of this imm’inent chance,</span>
            <br>
            <span>See how he snatcheth while to durance led</span>
            <br>
            <span>From grasp of Moorish foe the beamy lance,</span>
            <br>
            <span>And lays with single lunge its lancer dead.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Then with strong arm the weapon swung askance,</span>
            <br>
            <span>He saves his friends the while his foes have fled:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Thus all triumphant wend his men their way</span>
            <br>
            <span>Whither their lot was sad captivity.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">7</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Lo! here is he by snare once more beset,</span>
            <br>
            <span>And in the darkness of vile stable lain,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Loaded with iron fetters of such weight,</span>
            <br>
            <span>From off the floor he mote not rise again.</span>
            <br>
            <span>But see the heart with gen’erous fire irate,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Tear up the stake that showed a bloody stain,</span>
            <br>
            <span>And brain the haughty Moor who had not fear’d</span>
            <br>
            <span>Foul hand to fasten on his honoured beard?</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">8</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Yet further see yon faithless Hagarene,</span>
            <br>
            <span>By the commandment of his Inf’idel King,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Visit the daring deed with scourge so keen</span>
            <br>
            <span>That strips from ribs his robes with stripes that sting.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Yet the brave Baron scorns one word, nor e’en</span>
            <br>
            <span>An ‘Ah!’ a murmur, may his tortures wring:</span>
            <br>
            <span>To Portugale the ragged vesture goes</span>
            <br>
            <span>Wherewith to raise a ransom for the foes.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">9</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Behold yon Aguer Headland tane, and lost</span>
            <br>
            <span>By fault of tardy succouring soldiery:</span>
            <br>
            <span>And see’st thou great Carvalho ’mid the host</span>
            <br>
            <span>Hostile, like baited bull the ring o’erfly?</span>
            <br>
            <span>Hear him ’mid thirty Moorish corpses boast</span>
            <br>
            <span>Whirling his broadsword, crying:—‘Since I die</span>
            <br>
            <span>Let dead atone for this mine òbscure doom,</span>
            <br>
            <span>These carrion deadlings form my fittest tomb!’</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">10</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“See how when both his legs a passing ball</span>
            <br>
            <span>In pieces dasht and shanks from trunk had mown;</span>
            <br>
            <span>On arms and knees he doth his best to crawl</span>
            <br>
            <span>And fight with force and valour never known:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Round and about the field evanish all</span>
            <br>
            <span>Hagar’s hard children who no pity own;</span>
            <br>
            <span>And with their shafts and javelins far they deal,</span>
            <br>
            <span>The death they dare not by a nearer steel.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto X. (after Stanza 73).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span> “With sim’ilar labours, Gestes so great, so new</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of valour never viewed, nor reached by thought,</span>
            <br>
            <span> To Honour shall ye rise so high, so true,</span>
            <br>
            <span>To excellences Heaven’s will hath wrought</span>
            <br>
            <span>’Mid worlds of men for you and only you,</span>
            <br>
            <span>While Phœbus warms what salty billows moat:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Rare boons be these which rarely doled we find</span>
            <br>
            <span>To man, and only in you men conjoin’d.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">2</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Religion first, the Truths sublime reveal’d</span>
            <br>
            <span>In earthly garb of pious holy Zeal;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Fain to Divine Obedience self to yield</span>
            <br>
            <span>And all imbibèd with its works of weal.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Thus men fare swimming to th’ Elysian field;</span>
            <br>
            <span>And thus in Life and Death shall ever deal</span>
            <br>
            <span>Mortals, who strain to win the princely prize</span>
            <br>
            <span>Which high religious Monarchy affies.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">3</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Loyalty second, that makes great and grand</span>
            <br>
            <span>Above all others, hearts of noble strain;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Whereby a certain likeness mortals fand</span>
            <br>
            <span>To Choirs immortal in the Heav’enly Reign.</span>
            <br>
            <span>For this be known o’er farthest sea and land</span>
            <br>
            <span>The passing merits of the Lusitan;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Ne’er to his Maker nor sworn King forsworn,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Nor holds such publick Faith to public scorn.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">4</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
          <td>
            <span>“Valour next cometh, which of yore did greet,</span>
            <br>
            <span>In olden Lusus, men who sang and wrote;</span>
            <br>
            <span>And which your Portingalls with greater feat</span>
            <br>
            <span>Certify veridic withouten doubt:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Affording novel theme to modern writ,</span>
            <br>
            <span>With their high exploits of memorious note;</span>
            <br>
            <span>And, vanquishing o’er the world the most renown’d,</span>
            <br>
            <span>By fewer vanquisht they shall ne’er be found.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">5</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Conquest shall prove the fourth, which in the power</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of only Portugale full-forced resideth;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Since in the higher Hemisphere and lower</span>
            <br>
            <span>O’er Earth’s four quarters she alone abideth:</span>
            <br>
            <span>The four great Nations only serve to show her</span>
            <br>
            <span>What high mysterious Hope her conquests guideth;</span>
            <br>
            <span>That Christian, Moorman, Turk, and Gentile all,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Joinèd in single law shall feel her thrall.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">6</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
          <td>
            <span>“Discov’ery comes the fifth, which of a truth</span>
            <br>
            <span>To none save Lusus’ children doth belong;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Who have explorèd all from North to South</span>
            <br>
            <span>Where suns be short-lived and where days be long.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Now by uncertain ways, unused, uncouth,</span>
            <br>
            <span>From Ponent Lèvantward, in daring strong,</span>
            <br>
            <span>She wends to circle Earth by shortest tract:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-135" id="noteref-135">[135]</a></span>
            <br>
            <span>A feat which never was till now a fact.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">7</td>
          <td class="padt">7</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
          <td>
            <span>“I pass in silence o’er the Piety</span>
            <br>
            <span>And courteous ways that mark the Lusian breast;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Temperance, Holy Faith, Zeal, Charity,</span>
            <br>
            <span>With other gifts as easy to attest.</span>
            <br>
            <span>For ’tis a not’able point of verity,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Moral Philosophy’s own rule and hest,</span>
            <br>
            <span>No single virtue e’er hath Man array’d</span>
            <br>
            <span>When all the others do not arm and aid.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">8</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“But these, the first foundation and the base</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of those renownèd five transcendencies,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Whereon they rest and rise by Nature’s grace,</span>
            <br>
            <span>And whence they borrow fair dependencies.</span>
            <br>
            <span>Here I neglect; for stoop I not to trace</span>
            <br>
            <span>That meaner matter which the tendence is</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of human nature in the gen’eral view:—</span>
            <br>
            <span>Only I tell what dwells in only you.</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">9</td>
          <td class="padt">9</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Natheless expect not to run clear and pure,</span>
            <br>
            <span>The course uneven of your Race’s story:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Such the condition of our state obscure,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of human life-tide fragile, transitory:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Death and Destruction, travail sore and dure</span>
            <br>
            <span>Shall mingle water in your wine of glory;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Yet ne’er shall force of Fortune, nor of Fate</span>
            <br>
            <span>Degrade your gifts, debase your high estate.<br></span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">10</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
          <td>
            <span>“Shall dawn the Day o’er either Hemisphere</span>
            <br>
            <span>By you explored, and conquerèd in fight,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Where battle, slaughter, prison-doom strike fear</span>
            <br>
            <span>In all the peoples subject to your might:</span>
            <br>
            <span>The twain of mightiest empires which is peer</span>
            <br>
            <span>In Spain beneath one sceptre shall unite;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Owning for cap’ital, Ladye of the Land,</span>
            <br>
            <span>The goodly City hither sends your band.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-136" id="noteref-136">[136]</a></span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">11</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“And now, o’er earth establisht, Race renown’d</span>
            <br>
            <span>Whom God in Cath’olick bosom hath conservèd,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Redeemed from horrid pains of Hell profound,</span>
            <br>
            <span>For hosts of damnèd Heathenry reservèd;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Dower’d with the losses of Lusbel<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-137" id="noteref-137">[137]</a>
              immund,</span>
            <br>
            <span>Lusbel, by vile and vulgar spirits servèd;</span>
            <br>
            <span>Since all Earth’s glories ye have learnt to gain,</span>
            <br>
            <span>’Ware lest ye lose the glory sovereign.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>

        <tr class="mid-header">
          <td class="padt">Canto X. (after Stanza 141).</td>
        </tr>

        <tr>
          <td>
            <span>“Hence shall he wend<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-138" id="noteref-138">[138]</a> his
              way, and end the light</span>
            <br>
            <span>Of Life, when landed on that fatal Isle:</span>
            <br>
            <span>Nor less his vent’urous Fleet shall wing her flight</span>
            <br>
            <span>Returning homeward from such miracle;</span>
            <br>
            <span>The far-famed ship ‘Victória’ men shall sight</span>
            <br>
            <span>Anchored in safest waters by Sevile,</span>
            <br>
            <span>When she had girdled Ocean-plain profound</span>
            <br>
            <span>And circled Earth in one continuous round.”</span>
          </td>
        </tr>
      </tbody></table>
    </section>

    <section id="rejected-stanzas-endnotes">

      <h3>Rejected Stanzas Endnotes.</h3>
      <ol start="127">

        <li id="note-127">
          <p>“Prester John.” <a href="#noteref-127" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-128">
          <p><i>Sic</i> in orig. <a href="#noteref-128" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-129">
          <p><i>i.e.</i>, the lance. <a href="#noteref-129" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-130">
          <p>Sans peur. <a href="#noteref-130" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-131">
          <p>Espada; sword or (suit of) spades. <a href="#noteref-131" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-132a"><span id="note-132b"></span>
          <p>Count Julian and Roderick the Goth. <a href="#noteref-132a" class="pginternal">↩a</a> <a href="#noteref-132b" class="pginternal">↩b</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-133">
          <p>D. Joam III. <a href="#noteref-133" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-134">
          <p>Saffi town. <a href="#noteref-134" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-135">
          <p>Magellan’s circumnavigation. <a href="#noteref-135" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-136">
          <p>A prophecy not unlikely to be realized. <a href="#noteref-136" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-137">
          <p>Lucifer, the Fiend. <a href="#noteref-137" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>

        <li id="note-138">
          <p>Magellan. <a href="#noteref-138" class="pginternal">↩</a></p>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </section>
  </section>