<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="rejected-stanzas" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<header>
					<h2>The Rejected Stanzas.</h2>
					<p class="center uppercase">(Estancias Desprezadas)</p>
				</header>
				<h3>Note.</h3>
				<p>These Stanzas, omitted by Camoens, were discovered by Manoel de Faria y Sousa, and published in his Commentaries (Juan Sanches, 1639). The whole are extant in three manuscripts. Number I., the better of the two first, contains only six cantos: Number II., belonging to M. Correia Montenegro, embraces the whole poem. The third MS., in the hands of M. Luiz Franco, is given by Viscount Juromenha (Vol. VI. 419). It has only four “rejected stanzas”; the first three are those of Faria y Sousa; and the fourth is that of the established text (Canto I. 79) with a few unimportant changes of words and rhymes.</p>
				<p>The Stanzas number:—</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<abbr title="Manuscript">MS.</abbr>
							</td>
							<td>
								<abbr title="Number">No.</abbr>
							</td>
							<td>1,</td>
							<td>48 + 2 fragments</td>
							<td class="center pad-left">=</td>
							<td class="pad-left right">49</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td class="center">”</td>
							<td class="center">”</td>
							<td>2,</td>
							<td>(Correia Montenegro’s)</td>
							<td class="center pad-left">=</td>
							<td class="pad-left right">26</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td class="center">”</td>
							<td class="center">”</td>
							<td>3,</td>
							<td>(Luiz Franco’s)</td>
							<td class="center pad-left">=</td>
							<td class="pad-left right">4</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td class="pad-left right" colspan="5">Total</td>
							<td class="border-top pad-left right">79</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>I will not here enter into the consideration why the Stanzas were left out. Many of them fully equal those retained in the popular “Lusiads”; but almost all contain something opposed to public, or rather to priestly, sentiment. A cursory glance shows that not a few want the polish and finish which distinguish the Poem. I have purposely followed suit for the sake of contrast and fidelity. Juromenha’s original text is printed <i>in verso</i>, that the reader may judge how literal is my version, which, for additional security, was submitted to Mr. J. J. Aubertin, the translator of “The Lusiads.”</p>
			</header>
			<section id="rejected-stanzas-body">
				<h3>Rejected Stanzas.</h3>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td>
								<span class="smcap">Manuscript No. 1.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td colspan="2">Canto I. Stanza 77 (modified).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">1</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>He spake in fury wood, like wight insane,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And straight alighted on the Theban way,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where mortal gest and human vesture tane,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He bore where new-born Phœbus bears the Day.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now spans his flight the Med’iterranean Main,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now spurns the bounds of Cleopatra’s sway;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now leaves to right the Garamántes-land,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And circumjacent sheets of Libyan sand.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">2</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>Now leaves he Mer’oe ’mid the fiery downs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fed by the waters of the Sev’en-flood River,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Realms which the high and holy President<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-127" id="noteref-127">[127]</a> owns,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Christ His doctrine old and true Believer:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He passes drouthy land whose people wones</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lacking the Lakes that roll their waters ever;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The very birth-place of the secret Nyle</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who breeds the monstrous brood of crocodile.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">3</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>Hence to the Prasum Headland fast he flies;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, making Mozambíque, in briefest space</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Becomes the Counterfeit, in Moorman guise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of one that held high honourable place.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, as the Regent much this Moor did prize,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Entering with somewhat sad and chargèd face,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Began the Theban thus his plaint to make,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Removing others who sat near the Shaykh.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto I. (after Stanza 80).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“And eke, that credit these my words befall,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Showing what plotteth yon false Capitayne,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Know, when thou wendedst on thy guest to call</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I heard this case debated ’twixt a twain:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In what I tell thee make no interval,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I will truly tell thee how, where, when,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou canst destroy them; for I lief believe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We should deceive him who would us deceive.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto III. (after Stanza 10).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Between this Ocean, and the waters shed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To feed large Tanaïs, flowing ceaseless flood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dwell the Sarmatæ races, who are fed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On mare-milk diet mixt with purpling blood.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here live the Mysian peoples that o’erspread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A part of Asia, low, inglorious brood;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Abii who banish women; and with these</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A host of tribes that drink Borysthenes.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto III.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“But his ill mother following whither led</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her woman’s bosom ready aye to range,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Took Dom Bermudo to her marriage-bed,—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Dom Bermudo’s brother takes in change.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See the foul, sinful, bestial action bred</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By crime begetting crime! Strange, mighty strange!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That left her husband she remains for e’er</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His marriage-sister and his married fere.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 2).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Translated in the Millié-Dubeux edit. of 1862.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“The meed of valour Bastards aye have claimèd</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By Arts or Arms, or haply both conjoinèd;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such were of fabled Gods the most enfamèd</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To whom rude Antients highest rank assignèd.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hermes, and doct Apollo still are namèd</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For varied Science with long Art combinèd;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Others by Arms alone prevail; so reign</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bacchus and Hercules, that Theban Twain.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">2</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Homer and Orpheus, eke, of birth were base,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The pair by Po’etry raised to such degree;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And they, the Sires of that Imperial race,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who founded Troy and Rome for Italy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay, an in written legend trust we place,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though many Philip made the father be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Macedonia’s Youth, not few would prove</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Great Nectanébus<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-128" id="noteref-128">[128]</a>filcht his mother’s love.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">3</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Thus Justiciary Pedro’s bastard son,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Being exalted o’er the realm to sway,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By Gestes of arms such goods of Fortune won</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That equalled ev’ery Great of bygone day.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He, when his kingdom feared to be undone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And prostrate lie, the proud Castilian’s prey,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bateth the terror his own lieges tries;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in all others Esp’erance falsifies.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 11).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td>Omitted because Catalonia and Arragon<br/>
							did not then belong to Castile (?).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Remainèd none in realm of Tarragon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who shirkt to mell in Mavors’ dour emprize:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>None in the noble City, whose renown</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon her founder Scipio’s name relies.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And last not least the far-famed Barcelon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sent warmen tried in warlike exercise:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All these strong powers uniteth haughty Spain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Against our little Lusitanian reign.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 13).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Oh, foes unnat’ural! Nature so misbred,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Race of thy race’s name disgrace that art!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Degenerates! caitiffs! say what feeble Dread,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sans wisdom, reason, all Man’s better part,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have made a gallant people, born and bred</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Loyal and brave with clean and candid heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Offend in such base guise? But I suspect</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Amid the Great this be the least defect.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV. (in lieu of Stanza 21).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“E’en as the noble Youth of Roman strain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Strengthend the Senate, fain in fear to fly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Carthaginian who, all-sovereign,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His whetted blade to shrinking throats brought nigh;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When worth’ily winning surname ‘African,’</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His furious force so did their force defy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His doubtful country free as air he made</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When jealous Fabius still his rede delay’d.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 27).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Now Titan’s daughter fresh and rosy came</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bringing that memorable, deathless day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When Vespers chaunted are in Mary’s name,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hon’ouring the holy month whose name is May.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This day for battle having fittest claim</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was chosen: Now, as paled the morning Gray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bleaching the skies, both Kings unsheathed their swords</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their hosts enheartening with hearty words.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 33).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“And, Emperors! you that held and had command</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er so much Earth, aye ready to resist</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In asp’erous conflict, and the wrong withstand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of cruel Traitors raising Treason’s crest:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Complain ye not: Nay, well this chance attend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One of the noblest Kings, and loved the best,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sees ’gainst his law, his crown, his self, his all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Vavasors rise to sue a stranger’s thrall.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="left padb">These Homeric stanzas on the deaths of Portuguese<br/>
							knights took away interest from the central<br/>
							figure, the King.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Piercèd<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-129" id="noteref-129">[129]</a> Giraldo’s vitals through and through</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And eke the huge thick targe he snatcht away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From Perez whom he killed; his own with hew</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And strangest hack of cutlass useless lay.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dies Pedro, and Duarte dies (in lieu</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of death amid the Brigians): Born were they</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both in Braganza, brave in youthful pride</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Together lived they, fought they, fell they, died.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">2</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Lopo and Vincent de Lisbóa bleed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sworn in the common cause to meet their fate;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or both the crown to gain and Victory’s meed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To snatch from all whom most enfamed this bate.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Afonso flieth from his battle-steed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For five Castilians (who in ambush wait</span>
								<br/>
								<span>to ’venge five comrades slain in earli’er strife)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Packing around him pluck his precious life.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">3</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Down falls Hilario drilled by spear-heads three;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But first he took the vengeance of his spear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He mourneth not because his Sprite goes free,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But for-that comes in it Antonia fair:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Flitteth the fug’itive Spirit fast, and flee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With it the thoughts sustaining all to dare;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And as life fled the service of his dame,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fell from his clay-cold lips her broken name.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV. (in lieu of Stanza 39).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“His foll’owers favour with a piercing cry</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This goodly lunge of lance; nor is he slow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To snatch another (for innum’erous lie</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The weapons lost by battle’s losing throw):</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He runs with couchèd spear: His bravery</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Urgeth his Braves who, brent with martial lowe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into the courser’s flanks keen rowels thrust,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lance the foeman level with the dust.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 40).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">1</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td/>
							<td>The corresponding deaths of Spanish knights.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Velasquez dies with Sanches de Toledo,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A mighty hunter this, and that a clerke:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Galbes eke perisheth surnamed ‘Sem Medo,’<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-130" id="noteref-130">[130]</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span>For thus his comrades called for countermark:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Montánchez, Oropésa, Mondonhedo</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(Albeit skilled in arms, in sinews stark),</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fell by Antonio’s hand, stout youth and brave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose lance more dext’erous drave them to the grave.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">2</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Braggart Guevára, who his front had dyed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hands and beard with blood that tinged the plain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That he might bluster how the gory tide</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had spurted painting him with honour’d stain:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Him, bell’owing such bravados in his pride,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pedro who heard the vauntings loud and vain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Felled with such side stroke, that his empty head</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Flew from his body and his base life fled.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">3</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Flew high in airy space his feckless pate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While still a-boasting of some blatant Geste:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pedro, besprinkled by the squirt and jet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Feels black blood trickling down his beard and breast;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherewith the mal’apert pays his vengeance debt.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Carrilho’s sun eke setteth in its west,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Joam de Lorca and Robledo follow;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While th’ other braves in flight their boasts must swallow.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">4</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Salazar, famous par’asite, and the head</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pander who made Sevilha town infame;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom his false leman had at night-tide fled</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though to the ’campment she had brought her shame;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lief would with other friend this fair friend bed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For-that the ducats wherewithal he came,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were lost upon a cast; nor were they lost</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had but a hand of spades came uppermost.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">5</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“His she-friend’s treason gars him wits to tyne;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And threaten un’iverse, earth and vagueing skies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blaspheming; and resolve with rage indign</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All who dare cross his valour to chastise:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Encount’ering Gaspar (who his Catherine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Loves as his life) the broadsword fast he plies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till air fire-smitten makes him fain believe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such stroke of mighty blade a hill could cleave.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">6</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Fondly he hopes the foe to hew in twain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But Gaspar, sighting overhead the blade,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Runs in, and catcheth him with gripping strain:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twas a fair feat of skill and hardihead:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Spaniard clippeth, yet doth not restrain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His boastful threat’ening, although conquerèd;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The forceful Portingall with short delay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unarms his hands and leaps from out his way.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">7</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Then, lest his foeman use such crafty mode</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Himself had used, he deals stoccado-thrust:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In fine the broadsword in his bosom-blood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He bathes that naught to vengeance mote he trust.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Flieth the furious ghost and in the wood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tartarean still blasphemes; relates his lust</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For vengeance, who no more can scourge his quean,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While him Alecto scourgeth long and keen.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">8</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“The Spatha’s<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-131" id="noteref-131">[131]</a> metal to the damnèd host</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ill-names he calleth heaping curses dread;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which, when it entered not, his ducats lost,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lost his life when it had enterèd.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pluto to gar him pay Sin’s scot and cost,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shows him the trait’orous ladye-friend who fled</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Joyed by his rival raining greedy kisses:—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He starts to strike them but the Shades he misses.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 44).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Oh vain reflections’ guiling human sense!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How could this darkling error seal your sight?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How have ye hugged this gay and glad pretence</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That lures to ’sanguined hate and baneful fight?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now of bloodshed dour experience,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A sore dread trial of the deadly blight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is shown to thee. And now when known thy lot</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou shalt give counsel which thou tookest not.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">2</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“The corpses of the Cavaliers, our fone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fed the foul creatures of the field and wood:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The nearest fountains till some days were gone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Distilled their chrystal black with human blood.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The meadow-shepherds, and the swains who wone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon the mountain, loathed the fulsome food,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The feral bird,—which for a year and more,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Smackt of the gorgèd flesh and human gore.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV. (Stanza 49: <i>varia lectio</i>).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>Pond’ering such mighty deeds of derring-do</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Prophetick Proteus thus to Neptune cried:—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“I fear shall spring such Braves from Braves like these</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who the great sceptre of thy Reigns shall seize!”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">2</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“He gaineth now the Porte inexpugnable</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereof the Traitor-Count<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-132a" id="noteref-132a">[132a]</a> first oped the gate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In blood to wash the love inevitable</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fired in Rodrigo’s<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-132b" id="noteref-132b">[132b]</a> heart by hand of Fate.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet this was not the cause abominable</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That wasted populous Hispanian State:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God for some hidden judgment gave command</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The house be opened by Rodrigo’s hand.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">3</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“But now thou livest safe, O noble Spain!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(If knightly force can save its land a fall)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From other loss like this, from shame and stain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who for a Porter hast the Portingall.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This happy Fortune waited on the reign</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of King Joanné,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-133" id="noteref-133">[133]</a> who the bounding wall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Spanish-lond molested many years;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And conquerèd a higher crest uprears.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV. (Stanza 61: <i>varia lectio</i>).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Of Venice, splendid in prosperity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Venice, whereto the fisher peoples fled</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From Gothic fury, and the cruelty</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Attila, and built the pauper town</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now raised to rich estate and high renown.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 66).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Nor chosen was sans justest cause and care</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To fill the lofty throne of governance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This King, whose noble heart and spirit rare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pledgèd and promised highest esperance:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For him, there being no directer heir</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And urgèd mostly by such confidence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Joanné chose as heir to reign alone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Having no son-inheritor to the throne.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto IV. (after Stanza 86).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“There did we promise, if His mercy deign</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bear us safe where Phœbus bursts the womb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or to blind worlds we would His faith ordain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or headstrong Heathenesse to death would doom.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All for our Souls’ eternal health were fain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With pure, veracious shrift our Sprites t’ illume,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereby, though Her’eticks may its power decry,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Souls like the ren’ovate Phœnix heav’enward fly.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">2</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Then to partake of Ghostly Meat we went,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By whose most gracious boon so many days,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sans taste of other earthly nutriment,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Erst were sustained Elias and Moysès:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bread, whose deep secrets ne thought eminent</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ne subtle lore, ne soaring phantasies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall ever fathom, ever plumb its might,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An to dark Reason Faith deny her light.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto VI. (after Stanza 7).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>There, in sublime Italia, yawns a cave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Secret and celebrate, Avernus hight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherethrough the Trojan leader bold and brave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gainèd Infernus-realm of gloomy Night.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And als this Antre easy adit gave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By road untrod, to Ocean’s middle site,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Sea-god Neptune’s proper tenement:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now thither Bacchus ’gan the long descent.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto VI. (after Stanza 24).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>Dolour of fell Dislove hath no respect</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For fault or for unfault on either part;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If what thou lovest lief thy love reject</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only some sore revenge shall salve the smart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But say, What profit shall thy love expect,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When she thou lovest hath bestowed her heart?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How shall for others Love himself deny</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When Love delights his foll’owers aye to fly?</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto VI. (after Stanza 40).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“What boots recounting feats and gestes notorious</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of cel’ebrate Capitaynes and grand campaigns,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where vaunting Death boasts asp’erous might victorious</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er alien will he bendeth as he fain ’is?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let others sing and say the deeds memorious</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Achieved by Conq’uerors on their battle-plains:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let it be mine (if worlds will hear) to tell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How by a pair of eyes’ mere force I fell.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">2</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>No little pleasure to Velloso gave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So fair a subject watch and ward to ’guile,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For as dure warfare made him dour and brave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So gentled Love his breast by soft’ening wile.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such is the cunning of this Cupid-knave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So Art with Nature can he reconcile,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While mortal hearts with blandness it endowereth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lovers with double pow’er his will empowereth.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">3</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Recount” (quoth he), “recount of Love, fair Sir!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And of the wondrous chances Love befel,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Still his sharp arrows this sad bosom stir</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That may not hurt of open wound dispel.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With him agreed each watchful mariner,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That all and ev’ery, then and there, should tell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their tales of Love, and how the ventures farèd:—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thiswise its watch to keep the crew preparèd.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">4</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>Then quoth Le’onardo: “Here let no man wot</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From me to gather fables known of yore:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whoso would quote the tears of alien lot</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Himself exempted hath no tears in store.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sith Love with magick eye-glance mortals smote</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Those dearest en’emies mine smote none so sore</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Mid men as me; nor Pyramus nor him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who from Abydos Helle’s stream did swim.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">5</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Fortune, who vaunteth o’er the world her might</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Already drave me far from Fatherland,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where I long time had lived, sufficient quite</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To lose a blessing which I held in hand.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yes, free I lived; yet nought astounds my sprite</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save that my freedom I could not command,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But changed for prison, since mine every thought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would I or nould I, boon of Love besought.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto VI. (after Stanza 81).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Thou Guard divine, who dost with Angels dwell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And of the Starry Pole hast seigniory;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou who didst bring Thy people Israèl</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through the burst waters of the blushing sea:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If from more risks than what t’ Æneas fell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or Ithican Ulysses sav’edst thou me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passing Apollo’s largely bounded path</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through rage of Æolus and Tethys’ wrath.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto VI. (after Stanza 94).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>Look ye, how following fast on fierce despair</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We win the weal that seemed beyond our range;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus ever dogging happy days sans care</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Comes hateful Sorrow with her certain change.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whoso would win such lore, such secret bare,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How Chance shall aye Security estrange,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I wot, his wisdom would no blessing gain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But breed a madness in his brooding brain.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">2</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>I have short answer for the wights who say</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That fickle Fortune deals in living lies;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That God hath made for pillar of His sway</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A goddess ranging aye ’twixt fall and rise.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Importunate opinion men obey</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That Man, whose nature with the Angels vies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For whom his God such goodness wrought, is rulèd</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By blindfold chances, and by luck befoolèd.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">3</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>Who saith that Good or Ill be reason why,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lowly up, the lofty downward, go;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What shall he say me se’eing the low rise high?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What shall he say me se’eing the high fall low?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If some should say “we’re born predestined,” I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Find it an asp’erous reason so to trow;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If darkly bound by bond of Destiny,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What boots a Sinner or a Saint I be?</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">4</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>Such dreadful storm the Portingalls tormented,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All were assurèd life was surely lost;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sudden it passèd and to them presented</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Venus the guerdon which they yearned for most.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Meanwhile Cabral whose wreck and wrack distented</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The list of losses on that portless coast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Saves his life gladly, and at once he loses ’t</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Because what men call Chance or Dest’iny choses ’t.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">5</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>An he must lose his life in one short hour,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To save the span before what could avail?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We ask why Fortune’s all prevailing pow’er</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon the heels of ill sent nought of weal?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Well said the Sage, so famed for el’egant lore,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Simonides, who from his safe portail</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beheld his rev’elling friends within the hall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Crusht by the fragments of the fallen wall:—</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">6</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Oh, force of Fortune grievous, sore to dree,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That hast so many in one moment slain!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Say for what greater bane hast savèd me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom thou hast savèd from this present bane?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Certès, the wrath of Heav’en right well I see:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No harm sufficeth for his rage insane:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor ill he workèd but the will he had</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Eftsoons of working something worse than bad.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">7</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>Right well I wot that many shall be found</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With subtle reasons Faith to re-assure;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Many by Second Causes shall expound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>High matters sound sure judgment doth depure.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To all I pledge myself, I could respond</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Did art of scribe such mighty theme endure:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I but respond that long Experience</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oft shows your Science lacking common Sense.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="center" colspan="2">
								<span class="smcap">Manuscript No. II.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto VIII. (after Stanza 32).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">1</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“This the foundation-stone sublimely laid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the Braganza House, illustrious strain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which in estate and grandeur all outweigh’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whatever vaunts the high Hispanian reign.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seest thou him, who with the stout Armade</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cutteth th’ Hesperian sea, forthwith to gain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His brave objective; wends this stout pretender</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Azamor town to fight and gar surrender?</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">2</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“’Tis ducal Gemes, ’heriting from his sires</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of old nobility a name memorious,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who does this mighty deed; and ’s high desires</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fulfilled, to Portugale returns victorious.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This time a valour which the world admires</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leaveth the Moorman in such fear inglorious,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who to the Present is nowise relievèd</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the cold burthen in the Past conceivèd.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">3</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“And, if the famous Duke forbore as wont</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Catholick conquests farther still to bear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unto Marocco’s mures and Terudant,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And other thousand thorpes the Haven near;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deem not his constant soul of spirit scant,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or wanting energy or slow to dare;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twas that his loyalty to cross declinèd</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The certain limits which his King assignèd.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto VIII.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“In such unfairest odds and chance of fray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One of our soldiers was begirt by foes;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But he, by valour more than mail, makes way</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And of true warrior-heart fair ’surance shows;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Slain the near charger with his sabre-sway</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its rider’s head upon the plain he throws;—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Brave sworder-feat!—and, pace by pace, he leaveth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Arear the foeman whom such exploit grieveth.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto X. (after Stanza 72).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Shalt see, in fine, conspire all India, ’drest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bellick apparatus; peoples rush</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cháúl, Maláca, Goa-town t’ invest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At once such different sites to seize and crush.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But see, now Cháúl City sorely prest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The seas with em’inent billows flies to brush</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Castro, in haste his Portingalls to save</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When only God in Mercy’s aid they crave.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">2</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Se’est thou yon Paynim King so fain of fight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Burn, overrun, beleaguer, firm persist</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In throwing forces which the land affright</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Against a little squad that loveth <span class="smcap">Christ</span>?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But bear that gen’erous Pundonor in sight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ne siege ne battle e’er before hath wist;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See how the sold’iery flying posts secure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pass to the post of peril dire and dure.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto VIII. (after Stanza 36).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“In such unfairest odds and chance of fray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One of our soldiers was begirt by foes;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But he, by valour more than mail, makes way</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And of true warrior-heart fair ’surance shows;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Slain the near charger with his sabre-sway</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its rider’s head upon the plain he throws;—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Brave sworder-feat!—and, pace by pace, he leaveth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Arear the foeman whom such exploit grieveth.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">3</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“There shall Ataide, most for prudence known,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Strong in the ghostly comfort of the Lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where Time and Need demand such force be shown,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With more than human valour aid afford.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Until its salvage object shall disown</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With grievous losses yon vile Pagan horde,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who crusht in thousand cruel fights shall rue</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The war, and hurry for a truce to sue.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">4</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“While here so happeth on the coast that glows</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Asia and Am’erica sombre cold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There not the less in Europe bellicose,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Barb’ary’s wild uncultivated wold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall show thy Race, Elysian, valorous</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its worth and with a freezing fear enfold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The seething Zone, that sees one conquest won</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pass to three other and ne’er pause till done.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">5</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Barriga, brave of braves, they here shall sight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Guide of Zafim,<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-134" id="noteref-134">[134]</a> in war of prime account,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who finds no man-at-arms to foil his might,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’errun the Mauritanian plain and mount.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But see how th’ Infidels, by luck of fight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And doom disastrous, in the very brunt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Make him and his Bellona’s battle-prize</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For in such chances Valour hopeless lies.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">6</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“But past the perils of this imm’inent chance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See how he snatcheth while to durance led</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From grasp of Moorish foe the beamy lance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lays with single lunge its lancer dead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then with strong arm the weapon swung askance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He saves his friends the while his foes have fled:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus all triumphant wend his men their way</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whither their lot was sad captivity.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">7</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Lo! here is he by snare once more beset,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in the darkness of vile stable lain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Loaded with iron fetters of such weight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From off the floor he mote not rise again.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But see the heart with gen’erous fire irate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tear up the stake that showed a bloody stain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And brain the haughty Moor who had not fear’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Foul hand to fasten on his honoured beard?</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">8</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Yet further see yon faithless Hagarene,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By the commandment of his Inf’idel King,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Visit the daring deed with scourge so keen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That strips from ribs his robes with stripes that sting.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet the brave Baron scorns one word, nor e’en</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An ‘Ah!’ a murmur, may his tortures wring:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To Portugale the ragged vesture goes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherewith to raise a ransom for the foes.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">9</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Behold yon Aguer Headland tane, and lost</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By fault of tardy succouring soldiery:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And see’st thou great Carvalho ’mid the host</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hostile, like baited bull the ring o’erfly?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hear him ’mid thirty Moorish corpses boast</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whirling his broadsword, crying:—‘Since I die</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let dead atone for this mine òbscure doom,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These carrion deadlings form my fittest tomb!’</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">10</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“See how when both his legs a passing ball</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In pieces dasht and shanks from trunk had mown;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On arms and knees he doth his best to crawl</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fight with force and valour never known:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Round and about the field evanish all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hagar’s hard children who no pity own;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And with their shafts and javelins far they deal,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The death they dare not by a nearer steel.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto X. (after Stanza 73).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“With sim’ilar labours, Gestes so great, so new</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of valour never viewed, nor reached by thought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To Honour shall ye rise so high, so true,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To excellences Heaven’s will hath wrought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Mid worlds of men for you and only you,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While Phœbus warms what salty billows moat:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rare boons be these which rarely doled we find</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To man, and only in you men conjoin’d.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">2</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Religion first, the Truths sublime reveal’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In earthly garb of pious holy Zeal;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fain to Divine Obedience self to yield</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all imbibèd with its works of weal.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus men fare swimming to th’ Elysian field;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thus in Life and Death shall ever deal</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mortals, who strain to win the princely prize</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which high religious Monarchy affies.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">3</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Loyalty second, that makes great and grand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Above all others, hearts of noble strain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereby a certain likeness mortals fand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To Choirs immortal in the Heav’enly Reign.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For this be known o’er farthest sea and land</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The passing merits of the Lusitan;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ne’er to his Maker nor sworn King forsworn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor holds such publick Faith to public scorn.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">4</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Valour next cometh, which of yore did greet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In olden Lusus, men who sang and wrote;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And which your Portingalls with greater feat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Certify veridic withouten doubt:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Affording novel theme to modern writ,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With their high exploits of memorious note;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, vanquishing o’er the world the most renown’d,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By fewer vanquisht they shall ne’er be found.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">5</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Conquest shall prove the fourth, which in the power</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of only Portugale full-forced resideth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since in the higher Hemisphere and lower</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er Earth’s four quarters she alone abideth:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The four great Nations only serve to show her</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What high mysterious Hope her conquests guideth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That Christian, Moorman, Turk, and Gentile all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Joinèd in single law shall feel her thrall.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">6</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Discov’ery comes the fifth, which of a truth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To none save Lusus’ children doth belong;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who have explorèd all from North to South</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where suns be short-lived and where days be long.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now by uncertain ways, unused, uncouth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From Ponent Lèvantward, in daring strong,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She wends to circle Earth by shortest tract:<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-135" id="noteref-135">[135]</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span>A feat which never was till now a fact.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">7</td>
							<td class="padt">7</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“I pass in silence o’er the Piety</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And courteous ways that mark the Lusian breast;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Temperance, Holy Faith, Zeal, Charity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With other gifts as easy to attest.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ’tis a not’able point of verity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Moral Philosophy’s own rule and hest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No single virtue e’er hath Man array’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When all the others do not arm and aid.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">8</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“But these, the first foundation and the base</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of those renownèd five transcendencies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereon they rest and rise by Nature’s grace,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And whence they borrow fair dependencies.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here I neglect; for stoop I not to trace</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That meaner matter which the tendence is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of human nature in the gen’eral view:—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only I tell what dwells in only you.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">9</td>
							<td class="padt">9</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Natheless expect not to run clear and pure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The course uneven of your Race’s story:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such the condition of our state obscure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of human life-tide fragile, transitory:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Death and Destruction, travail sore and dure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall mingle water in your wine of glory;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet ne’er shall force of Fortune, nor of Fate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Degrade your gifts, debase your high estate.<br/></span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">10</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Shall dawn the Day o’er either Hemisphere</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By you explored, and conquerèd in fight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where battle, slaughter, prison-doom strike fear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In all the peoples subject to your might:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The twain of mightiest empires which is peer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Spain beneath one sceptre shall unite;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Owning for cap’ital, Ladye of the Land,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The goodly City hither sends your band.<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-136" id="noteref-136">[136]</a></span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">11</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“And now, o’er earth establisht, Race renown’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom God in Cath’olick bosom hath conservèd,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Redeemed from horrid pains of Hell profound,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For hosts of damnèd Heathenry reservèd;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dower’d with the losses of Lusbel<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-137" id="noteref-137">[137]</a> immund,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lusbel, by vile and vulgar spirits servèd;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since all Earth’s glories ye have learnt to gain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Ware lest ye lose the glory sovereign.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="mid-header">
							<td class="padt">Canto X. (after Stanza 141).</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span>“Hence shall he wend<a class="note-anchor pginternal" href="#note-138" id="noteref-138">[138]</a> his way, and end the light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Life, when landed on that fatal Isle:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor less his vent’urous Fleet shall wing her flight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Returning homeward from such miracle;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The far-famed ship ‘Victória’ men shall sight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Anchored in safest waters by Sevile,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When she had girdled Ocean-plain profound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And circled Earth in one continuous round.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
